Department of Corrections
Chapter 291
Division 83
CONTROLLED FEEDING
291-083-0005
Authority and Purpose

(1) Authority: The authority for this rule is granted to the Director of the Department of Corrections in accordance with ORS 423.020 and 423.075.

(2) Purpose: To establish criteria and procedure for placement of an inmate on controlled feeding status.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 423
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
CD 28-1989, f. & cert. ef. 12-29-89
CD 13-1989(Temp), f. & cert. ef. 7-11-89
291-083-0010
Definitions

(1) Acceptable Behavior: Behavior that does not include throwing or misusing food or human waste or misuse of eating trays or utensils.

(2) Controlled Feeding Status: Status in which the form of food is modified and served as Nutra Loaf in order to reduce the use of food, eating utensils and human waste as weapons against staff and others.

(3) Functional Unit Manager: Any person within the Department of Corrections who reports to the Director, an Assistant Director, or an administrator and has responsibility for the delivery of program services or the coordination of program operations. In a correctional setting, the functional unit manager or designee is the superintendent.

(4) Human Waste: Materials issued from the human body, including but not limited to, blood, feces, urine, and other potentially infectious materials.

(5) Nutra Loaf: A product made from a combination of food items used in the preparation of mainline meals or medically assigned diets using standardized portion sizes and nutritionally balanced recipes. Recipes are kept on file by the Food Services Manager. The dietician is responsible for updating recipes and retaining nutritional information.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 18-2011, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-11
CD 28-1989, f. & cert. ef. 12-29-89
CD 13-1989(Temp), f. & cert. ef. 7-11-89
291-083-0015
Procedures

(1) Inmates may be placed immediately on controlled feeding status with the approval of the functional unit manager or designee t for the following behavior:

(a) Throwing or misusing food or human waste.

(b) Failure to voluntarily return the eating utensils and tray to staff after each meal.

(2) The staff member who observes the adverse behavior shall prepare a disciplinary report as outlined in the Department of Corrections Rule on Inmate Prohibited Conduct and for Processing Disciplinary Actions (OAR 291-105), containing the charges and other appropriate information.

(3) The housing unit officer in charge shall recommend to the functional unit manager or designee that an inmate be placed on controlled feeding status.

(4) Upon approval of the functional unit manager or designee, the housing unit officer in charge shall submit, prior to the end of the shift, a copy of the controlled feeding order form to the Food Services Manager or designee and retain the original form in the housing unit.

(5) Upon receipt of the controlled feeding order, the Food Services Manager or designee shall provide Nutra Loaf for the inmate on controlled feeding to coincide with the regular meal schedule.

(6) A review of the controlled feeding order shall be conducted by the functional unit manager or designee and the housing unit officer in charge every 24 hours from the reported misconduct. The 24 hour review shall be noted on the controlled feeding form and in the housing unit log. The completed original feeding form will be sent to the functional unit manager for archival disposition. A copy of the completed from, retained as part of the housing unit log, will suffice as documentation within the housing unit.

(7) Return to normal feeding and the outcome of the disciplinary hearing process are not necessarily related. Controlled feeding status shall be rescinded when the inmate demonstrates a return to acceptable behavior for a period of 24 hours. Return to normal feeding status does not affect the disciplinary process or the application of sanctions for rule violations.

(8) Seven days shall be the maximum length of time that an inmate shall remain on controlled feeding status per incident.

(9) If, after returning to regular feeding status, the disruptive behavior recurs, the inmate may be returned to controlled feeding status as outlined in this rule.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 18-2011, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-11
CD 13-1994, f. 7-19-94, cert.ef. 8-1-94
CD 28-1989, f. & cert. ef. 12-29-89
CD 13-1989(Temp), f. & cert. ef. 7-11-89