# Department of Corrections {#top}

## Chapter 291 - Division 130

### TELEPHONES \(INMATE\)

---

[291-130-0005 - Authority, Purpose, and Policy](#291-130-0005---Authority-Purpose-and-Policy)

[291-130-0006 - Definitions](#291-130-0006---Definitions)

[291-130-0011 - Operation of Inmate Telephones](#291-130-0011---Operation-of-Inmate-Telephones)

[291-130-0016 - General Provisions for Inmate Telephones](#291-130-0016---General-Provisions-for-Inmate-Telephones)

[291-130-0021 - Legal Calls](#291-130-0021---Legal-Calls)

[291-130-0025 - Operation and General Provisions of VIP Calls](#291-130-0025---Operation-and-General-Provisions-of-VIP-Calls)

[291-130-0026 - Monitoring, Termination and Blocking of Telephone and VIP Calls](#291-130-0026---Monitoring-Termination-and-Blocking-of-Telephone-and-VIP-Calls)

[291-130-0030 - Emergency Access](#291-130-0030---Emergency-Access)

[291-130-0050 - Use of Institution Telephones \(Inside Lines\)](#291-130-0050---Use-of-Institution-Telephones-\(Inside-Lines\))

[291-130-0060 - Location of Telephones and Hours of Telephone Use](#291-130-0060---Location-of-Telephones-and-Hours-of-Telephone-Use)

[291-130-0080 - Remaining Telephone Fund Balances Upon Release](#291-130-0080---Remaining-Telephone-Fund-Balances-Upon-Release)

---

### 291-130-0005 - Authority, Purpose, and Policy

---

1. _Authority:_ The authority for this rule is granted to the Director of the Department of Corrections in accordance with ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, and 423.075.

2. _Purpose:_ The purpose of this rule is to establish policy and procedures governing the use of the inmate telephone system.

3. _Policy:_ The department encourages productive relationships between inmates and their families and recognizes telephone services are a positive means to strengthen ties and increase the likelihood of success upon release.

  \(a\) It is the policy of the Department of Corrections to allow inmates to make telephone calls in accordance with the procedures outlined in this rule.

  \(b\) It is the policy of the Department of Corrections that video interactive phone calls are a part of the inmate telephone system, and such calls are governed by the same policy and procedures as telephone calls.

  \(c\) Within the inherent limitations of resources and the need for facility security, safety, health and good order, it is the policy of the Department of Corrections to permit, promote, facilitate, and encourage authorized use of telephone systems between inmates and their families, friends, and others in Department of Corrections facilities.

  \(d\) When authorized, use of the inmate telephone system in a Department of Corrections facility is permitted neither as a matter of right nor as a privilege of the inmate or the inmate’s contact party; rather, use of the telephone system in Department of Corrections facilities is permitted by the department when it furthers the inmate’s correctional planning and the department’s correctional goals and mission and is consistent with the safe, secure, and orderly management and operation of the facility.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15
> Reverted to CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93
> DOC 25-2014(Temp), f. 12-30-14, cert. ef. 1-1-15 thru 6-29-15
> DOC 18-2014(Temp), f. 7-7-14, cert. ef. 7-8-14 thru 12-31-14
> CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88

Back to Top

---

### 291-130-0006 - Definitions

---

1. _Access to Inmate Telephone System:_ An inmate’s use of a personal identification number \(PIN\) and validated voice recognition to connect to the inmate telephone system.

2. _Functional Unit Manager:_ Any person within the Department of Corrections who reports to either the Director, Deputy Director, an assistant director, or an administrator and has responsibility for the delivery of program services or coordination of program operations. In these rules, the functional unit manager is the superintendent of an institution or the Inspector General.

3. _Inmate Telephone System:_ The system authorized by the Department of Corrections to facilitate inmate telephone calls and video interactive phone \(VIP\) calls.

4. _Legal Telephone Calls:_ Telephone calls between an inmate and his/her attorney or the attorney’s documented representative\(s\), legal aid bureaus, or other organizations as deemed appropriate by the department.

5. _Media Representatives:_

  \(a\) Persons whose principal employment is with an accredited media organization;

  \(b\) Unaffiliated persons who produce credentials or other written documentation from an accredited media organization evidencing that the media organization has contracted with the person to purchase his/her completed work or project;

  \(c\) Unaffiliated persons who are affiliated with a department contractor or volunteer in connection with a department program or service; or

  \(d\) Authors of books who produce credentials or other written documentation that a commercial publisher has contracted to purchase their completed work/project.

6. _Officer in Charge:_ That person designated by the functional unit manager to supervise the facility and make operational decisions in accordance with policy, rule or procedure during periods when the functional unit manager or officer of the day are not readily available.

7. _Personal Identification Number (PIN):_ An assigned number used by an inmate to access the inmate telephone system.

8. _Prepaid Call:_ A telephone call placed by an inmate using funds paid in advance from a telephone account.

9. _Telephone Services:_ Telephone calls, VIP calls, and voice messages afforded to inmates through the inmate telephone system.

10. _Third Party VIP Call:_ Any VIP call wherein the original called party logs out of the established session and provides another party with a different IP address and sufficient information to log into the established VIP call. This includes any communication between the inmate and a third party utilizing the IP address.

11. _Three-Way Call:_ Any call that uses an intermediary call to bridge communication to a third party. This includes any communication between the inmate or the original called party with a third party not in the same location.

12. _Unaffiliated persons:_ Freelance writers, independent filmmakers, producers, and other persons who do not meet the definition of media representatives.

13. _Video Interactive Phone \(VIP\) Call:_ A call that has video interactive capabilities in which the parties are able to see and hear one another.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15
> Reverted to DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13
> DOC 25-2014(Temp), f. 12-30-14, cert. ef. 1-1-15 thru 6-29-15
> DOC 18-2014(Temp), f. 7-7-14, cert. ef. 7-8-14 thru 12-31-14
> DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13
> DOC 10-2012(Temp), f. 8-31-12, cert. ef. 9-1-12 thru 2-28-13
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06
> CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0011 - Operation of Inmate Telephones

---

1. Inmates shall provide their personal identification number \(PIN\) and validated voice recognition to gain access to the inmate telephone system.

  \(a\) Inmates are responsible to maintain the security of their access information.

  \(b\) An inmate may not use another inmate’s access information.

  \(c\) The department is not responsible for theft, loss, or costs related to an inmate lending his/her access information or failing to provide for its safekeeping.

  \(d\) An inmate’s PIN will be terminated if it has been lost, stolen, or if in the sole judgment of the functional unit manager or his/her designee, the PIN has been used by the inmate or another person to:

  - \(A\) Engage in activity that violates department rule, state or federal law; or

  - \(B\) Engage in other activity that poses a threat or is detrimental to the security, safety, health, good order or discipline within a Department of Corrections facility, inmate rehabilitation, or that facilitates criminal activity.

  \(e\) If an inmate’s PIN is terminated, the department will issue the inmate a new PIN. The department may assess the inmate a PIN replacement fee.

2. Prepaid Calls: The department will establish a telephone account for each inmate.

  \(a\) Inmates may transfer funds from their trust account to their telephone account. Availability of funds in the inmate’s trust account will be verified before any transfer of funds to the telephone account.

  \(b\) An inmate shall address any issues regarding funds in his/her telephone account directly to the inmate telephone service provider.

  \(c\) Prepaid calls will disconnect when funds in an inmate’s telephone account have been depleted.

  \(d\) Inmates may obtain their individual telephone account balance through the inmate telephone system.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15
> Reverted to DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13
> DOC 25-2014(Temp), f. 12-30-14, cert. ef. 1-1-15 thru 6-29-15
> DOC 18-2014(Temp), f. 7-7-14, cert. ef. 7-8-14 thru 12-31-14
> DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13
> DOC 10-2012(Temp), f. 8-31-12, cert. ef. 9-1-12 thru 2-28-13
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0016 - General Provisions for Inmate Telephones

---

1. All calls must be placed as collect or prepaid. Only collect or prepaid calls can be made from telephones designated for inmate use.

2. The functional unit manager or designee has the authority to restrict telephone calls by an inmate if the safety of the public would be involved, or the security of the facility, or safety and welfare of any person would be jeopardized.

3. Inmates shall not participate in three way calls or any form of call forwarding. An inmate may be assessed a service fee from the inmate telephone service provider if it is verified he/she has participated in a three-way call or any form of call forwarding.

4. Inmates shall not place charges to third party numbers, motels, hotels, places of business, credit cards or to telephone company calling card numbers.

5. If the telephone call cannot be completed because no one answers or the line is busy, the inmate shall hang up and attempt another call at another time.

6. Inmates shall not loiter in the surrounding area where telephones are located.

7. Only one inmate at a time shall be permitted access to a telephone. The inmate who initiates a call is the only person authorized to converse with the contact party during that call.

8. Inmates may be required to sign up on the telephone log \(CD755\) to reserve a time to use a telephone in a housing unit or activity area when there are a large number of inmates who want access to a telephone and there are a limited number of telephones.

9. A set of Oregon telephone directories for major cities shall be located in the facility library.

10. Special Housing: Inmates in special housing may be allowed telephone services as established by the functional unit manager. Special housing includes administrative housing, disciplinary segregation, Intensive Management Unit, Death Row housing, mental health special housing, and facility infirmaries.

  \(a\) Inmates in special housing may have restricted telephone services, and be allowed only emergency calls, legal calls as specified in OAR 291-130-0021, or other calls as authorized by the functional unit manager or designee.

  \(b\) Inmates in mental health special housing may have limited access to telephones if the access interferes with the inmate’s treatment.

11. The department may prohibit an inmate from calling a particular person or phone number when requested by the person, or in the case of a minor child, by the child’s parent or legal guardian.

12. Telephone calls between inmates and staff, volunteers, or contractors; or calls between inmates and former staff, volunteers, or contractors are not allowed without express written authorization by the functional unit manager or designee.

13. Other inmate telephone services or restrictions, not specifically addressed in this rule, may be implemented for safety and security reasons or as authorized by the functional unit manager.

14. Inmates shall report all inmate phone repair issues as directed by the department.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88; CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93, Renumbered from 291-130-0010(5); DOC 7-2002, f. & cert. ef 6-12-02; Renumbered from 291-130-0040, DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06; DOC 10-2012(Temp), f. 8-31-12, cert. ef. 9-1-12 thru 2-28-13; DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13; DOC 18-2014(Temp), f. 7-7-14, cert. ef. 7-8-14 thru 12-31-14; DOC 25-2014(Temp), f. 12-30-14, cert. ef. 1-1-15 thru 6-29-15; Administrative correction, 7-24-15

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0021 - Legal Calls

---

1. The department shall maintain a list of legal telephone numbers entitled the “legal call list.” Inmate calls to attorneys whose telephone numbers appear on the legal call list will not be monitored or recorded by the department. The legal call list shall include the official telephone numbers of all attorneys registered with and provided to the Oregon State Bar Association, official telephone numbers of attorneys who have requested and been added to the list as specified in subsection (2) below and business telephone numbers of other organizations as deemed appropriate by department and whose communication with inmates shall be considered confidential. The list of official numbers of attorneys registered with the Oregon State Bar will be updated twice a year.

2. Upon request of an attorney whose official telephone number is not on the legal call list or upon request of the attorney’s inmate client, the department will verify the number with the appropriate state bar and add the attorney’s official telephone number to the list. However, the department will not include an attorney’s home, cell or other telephone number on the department’s legal call list that is not the attorney’s contact telephone number provided to the appropriate state bar. Inmate calls to telephone numbers not on the legal call list will be subject to monitoring or recording by the department.

3. An inmate with an active or pending case with an imminent court deadline of ten business days or less who does not have regular access to the inmate telephone system \(e.g., the inmate is in disciplinary segregation or Intensive Management Unit\) may be permitted a legal call to his/her attorney as approved by the officer-in-charge or the inmate’s counselor.

  \(a\) Use of Inmate Telephone System: Designated staff will make arrangements for the inmate to make the call.

  \(b\) Use of Staff Phones: Designated staff will facilitate the call and verify the identity of the person called. The staff member shall leave the area where the call is taking place; however, the inmate shall be kept under observation. The call should be placed as collect, if possible. Use of staff phones for such calls shall be held to a minimum.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0025 - Operation and General Provisions of VIP Calls

---

1. Inmates are required to provide their personal identification number (PIN) and comply with a validation process to gain access to the inmate telephone system to make VIP calls.

2. The same provisions that apply to telephone calls as specified in OAR 291-130-0011 apply to VIP calls \(security of PIN and access\).

3. Inmates are responsible to schedule VIP calls through the inmate telephone system via kiosks located throughout each institution.

  \(a\) Accessibility to VIP calls will differ by institution given the uniqueness of each institution.

  \(b\) Inmates will be allowed to make VIP calls during designated times based on a first-come, first-served basis to access their accounts with staff authorization.

4. Inmates must place VIP calls as prepaid. The inmate telephone system does not allow collect VIP calls.

5. The functional unit manager or designee has the authority to restrict or revoke VIP calls by an inmate if the safety of the public would be involved, or the security of the facility, or safety and welfare of any person would be jeopardized.

6. If the inmate cannot complete the VIP call because the called party is not available or for other reasons, the inmate shall terminate the call and reschedule at another time.

7. Inmates shall not loiter in the surrounding area where kiosks are located.

8. Only one inmate at a time shall be permitted access to a VIP call. The inmate who initiates a VIP call is the only person authorized to converse with the contact party during that call. An inmate may be assessed a fee from the inmate telephone service provider if it is verified that more than one inmate participated in a VIP call.

9. Family VIP Calls: The functional unit manager or designee, at their sole discretion, may authorize more than one inmate to participate in a VIP call to encourage and promote responsible familial relationships.

10. Appropriate Clothing/Dress:

  \(a\) Inmates must be properly attired consistent with standards set forth in OAR 291-123-0015\(5\) and the inmate handbook.

  \(b\) The caller or contacted party is encouraged to wear clothing that is conservative in nature; e.g., clothing that is not unduly suggestive or form fitting. The caller or contacted party shall not display male or female genitalia, the pubic area or anus, or expose the female breasts.

11. VIP calls between inmates and staff, volunteers, or contractors; or between inmates and former staff, volunteers, or contractors are not allowed without express written authorization by the functional unit manager or designee.

12. Special Housing: Inmates in special housing are not allowed access to VIP calls, unless authorization is given by the functional unit manager. Special housing includes administrative housing, disciplinary segregation, Intensive Management Unit, Death Row housing, mental health special housing, and facility infirmaries.

13. The department may prohibit an inmate from participating in a VIP call with a particular person or phone number when requested by the person, or in the case of a minor child, by the child’s parent or legal guardian.

14. Inmates shall not participate in VIP calls with two or more parties using different IP addresses during the same VIP call. An inmate may be assessed a service fee from the inmate telephone service provider if it is verified he/she has participated in a VIP call with participants using more than one IP address.

15. Inmates shall not use VIP calls for interviews with media representatives or unaffiliated persons. Media representatives or unaffiliated persons may request an interview with an inmate in accordance with the department’s rules on Media Access \(OAR 291-204\).

16. Inmates shall not use VIP calls as an outlet for public performances to individuals or organizations.

17. Neither the inmate or contact party may record, re-broadcast, reproduce, duplicate, copy, sell, trade, or resell either the audio or video of the VIP call.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0026 - Monitoring, Termination and Blocking of Telephone and VIP Calls

---

1. All telephone calls and VIP calls are subject to monitoring and recording by the department except for legal telephone calls.

  \(a\) Directly above each group of monitored telephones, a sign shall be posted stating in English and Spanish, "Phone calls are subject to being monitored and recorded."

  \(b\) Directly above each VIP kiosk, a sign shall be posted stating in English and Spanish, “VIP calls are monitored and recorded.”

2. An inmate’s use of the inmate telephone system to engage in activity that is a violation of department rules, state, or federal law may result in disciplinary action and possible restriction of telephone services.

3. The department may block access to phone numbers used to commit a crime or violate department rules, including any attempt to place a three-way call or use any form of call forwarding. The owner of a telephone number that has been blocked for participation in a three-way call or call forwarding may request an administrative review by writing to the Inspector General.

4. An inmate’s telephone services may be suspended by the functional unit manager or his/her designee, in his/her sole discretion, when the functional unit manager or designee has reason to believe the inmate has used or may use inmate telephone services to:

  \(a\) Engage in activity that violates department rule, state or federal law; or

  \(b\) Engage in other activity that poses a threat or is detrimental to the security, safety, health, good order or discipline within a Department of Corrections facility, inmate rehabilitation, facilitates criminal activity, or jeopardizes the safety and welfare of any person.

  \(c\) The guidelines for suspension of VIP services for inmates and callers are found in Exhibit A. The functional unit manager or designee may consider mitigating or aggravating factors in administering a less or more severe sanction than indicated in the grid, including the issuance of a misconduct report for inmates.

  \(d\) If the activity is deemed to be a severe violation by the inmate of department rules, state, or federal law, disciplinary action will result; and the inmate will be held accountable in accordance with the provisions of the inmate disciplinary rules \(OAR 291-105\).

5. A **“high alert”** inmate under the management of the Security Threat Management Unit may have his/her telephone services or individual telephone calls suspended, restricted, or modified in accordance with OAR 291-069-0270, Management of High Alert Inmates.

> \[ED. NOTE: To view tables referenced in rule text, click here to view rule.\]

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> Renumbered from 291-130-0020, DOC 12-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-31-15
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88; CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93, Renumbered from 291-130-0010(3); DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06; DOC 10-2012\(Temp\), f. 8-31-12, cert. ef. 9-1-12 thru 2-28-13; DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13; DOC 18-2014\(Temp\), f. 7-7-14, cert. ef. 7-8-14 thru 12-31-14; DOC 25-2014(Temp), f. 12-30-14, cert. ef. 1-1-15 thru 6-29-15; Administrative correction, 7-24-15

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0030 - Emergency Access

---

1. All requests for emergency telephone calls from inmates, or a member of the public due to a death or serious illness of a person with a substantial relationship to an inmate may be approved by the officer-in-charge, inmate's counselor, or the chaplain upon verification of the emergency. Designated staff will facilitate the call and verify the identity of the person called. Calls shall be monitored by staff.

2. The functional unit manager or staff specifically designated by the functional unit manager may approve other emergency calls as necessary for issues specific to the inmate. Such calls will be handled in the same manner as in section \(1\) above.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88; CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93, Renumbered from 291-130-0010(4)

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0050 - Use of Institution Telephones \(Inside Lines\)

---

1. Inmates inside a facility will not answer outside lines unless specifically authorized in writing by the functional unit manager/designee.

2. Inmates authorized and assigned by a staff member may answer an institution telephone in an assigned area. Inmates so assigned shall answer by stating their title, last name, location, and saying, "May I help you." Example: "Inmate Jones, unit one, may I help you?"

3. Inmates may be assigned to make telephone calls as part of their job assignment.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06
> CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0060 - Location of Telephones and Hours of Telephone Use

---

1. The functional unit manager/designee shall designate hours for inmate telephone use.

2. Telephones located in recreational areas; i.e., yard, multi-purpose, shall normally be available during the normal hours inmates are allowed access to the respective area.

3. Locations of telephones and hours for use of telephones shall be posted on unit bulletin boards and included in inmate admission and orientation material or in inmate handbooks at all Department of Corrections facilities.

4. The functional unit manager may restrict the times telephones are available to inmates to conform to line movements, scheduled inmate activities, meals, and staff availability.

5. Call durations may vary based on the physical locations of phones as established by the functional unit manager/designee.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06
> CD 8-1993, f. 3-10-93, cert. ef. 4-1-93
> CD 5-1988, f. & cert. ef. 3-21-88

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---

### 291-130-0080 - Remaining Telephone Fund Balances Upon Release

---

Remaining funds balances received from the inmate telephone service provider will be deposited to individual inmate trust accounts as per the department’s rule on Trust Accounts \(OAR 291-158-0045\) less a processing fee imposed by the department. Funds deposited on behalf of inmates who are indebted to the department are subject to collection as per 291-158-0065. Any remaining funds are disbursed to the inmate through the Oregon Trail card or by check.

> Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
> History:
> DOC 2-2013, f. & cert. ef. 2-22-13
> DOC 10-2012(Temp), f. 8-31-12, cert. ef. 9-1-12 thru 2-28-13
> DOC 2-2006, f. 3-10-06, cert. ef. 3-13-06

[Back to Top](#top "Return to Top of Page")

---