Department of Corrections
Chapter 291
Division 139
LEGAL AFFAIRS (INMATE)
291-139-0100
Authority, Purpose, and Policy

(1) Authority: The authority for these rules is granted to the Director of the Department of Corrections in accordance with ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 and 423.075.

(2) Purpose: The purpose of these rules is to establish Department of Corrections policy and procedure for affording inmates reasonable access to law library services and equipment and to necessary supplies for the preparation and filing of legal documents with the courts and paroling authorities.

(3) Policy: Within the inherent limitations of resources and the need to promote and maintain facility security, safety, health, and order, and subject to operational contingencies and needs, it is the policy of the Department of Corrections to afford inmates reasonable access to law library services and equipment, and to necessary supplies for the preparation and filing of legal documents with the courts and paroling authorities, on a prioritized basis, in accordance with these rules.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0110
Definitions

(1) Active Case: A case or proceeding that is pending before a court or paroling authority.

(2) Cursory Review: A quick scan of documents conducted by the library coordinator or other corrections staff to verify that the documents belong to the inmate and are legal in nature.

(3) Department of Corrections Facility: Any institution, facility, or staff office, including the grounds, operated by the Department of Corrections.

(4) Functional Unit: Any organizational component within the Department of Corrections responsible for the delivery of services or coordination of programs.

(5) Functional Unit Manager: Any person within the Department of Corrections who reports to either the Director, Deputy Director, an Assistant Director, or an administrator and who has responsibility for delivery of program services or coordination of program operations.

(6) General Legal User: An inmate requesting access to law library services, equipment, or supplies in order to conduct legal research or to prepare a legal document in a matter that does not raise a legal challenge to the inmate’s conviction or sentence, or to the conditions of the inmate’s prison confinement, that is pending before or to be submitted to a court or paroling authority, including but not limited to the following matters: marriage dissolution(divorce), child custody, paternity, estate matters, DMV matters, social security benefits, wills, power of attorney, immigration, internal DOC administrative grievances, and general research

(7) Imminent Court Deadline: A deadline for the filing of a legal document with a court or paroling authority that must be received by the court or paroling authority within 30 calendar days.

(8) Indigent Inmate: An indigent inmate without sufficient funds in the inmate’s trust account at the time of request to pay for supplies or services needed to prepare or make required filings with a court or paroling authority.

(9) Inmate: Any person under the supervision of the Department of Corrections who is not on parole, probation, or post-prison supervision status.

(10) Legal Documents: Pleadings (i.e., complaint, petition or answer), legal motions and memoranda, affidavits, court orders and judgments, or other necessary papers submitted to a court in connection with a legal action. For purposes of these rules "legal documents" include necessary papers submitted to the Oregon Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision and equivalent releasing authorities in other state and federal jurisdictions in connection with official actions and proceedings of such authorities.

(11) Legal Assistant: An inmate assigned to work in a facility law library to help guide and assist other inmates with legal research and preparation of legal documents for filing with a court or paroling authority.

(12) Library Coordinator: A department employee assigned to provide general and law library services to inmates in a Department of Corrections facility.

(13) Priority Legal User: An inmate requesting access to law library services, equipment, or supplies in order to conduct legal research or to prepare a legal document in a matter that raises a legal challenge to the inmate’s conviction or sentence, or to the conditions of the inmate’s prison confinement that is pending before or to be submitted to a court or paroling authority. Matters may include: direct appeals and collateral challenges to the inmate’s conviction or sentence in state or federal court (i.e., direct appeals in Oregon Court of Appeals and Oregon Supreme Court, and United States Supreme Court; petitions for post-conviction relief in Oregon Circuit Court, and appeals in the Oregon Court of Appeals, Oregon Supreme Court, and United States Supreme Court; petitions for habeas corpus in United States District Court, and appeals in United States Courts of Appeal and United States Supreme Court; petitions for habeas corpus in in Oregon Circuit Court, and appeals in Oregon Court of Appeals and Oregon Supreme Court; actions for violation of federal civil rights under 42 USC Section 1983 in United States District Court, and appeals in United States Courts of Appeal and United States Supreme Court; and actions for violation of federal civil rights under 42 USC section 1983 filed in Oregon Circuit Court, and appeals in Oregon Court of Appeals and Oregon Supreme Court).

(14) Removable Media: Any storage device that can be portable, accessible, or connected to any computing device with the ability to process the contents held on that media. Examples include but are not limited to USB-based memory sticks, removable memory cards, portable audio/media players that support data storage, removable memory-based media, such DVDs, CDs, or floppy disks.

(15) Special Housing: Inmate housing assignments other than general population.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0120
Access to Law Library Services and Equipment

(1) General: Within the inherent limitation of resources and the need for facility security, safety, health, and order, and subject to operational contingencies, all inmates will be afforded reasonable opportunities to access law library services and equipment, and necessary supplies for the preparation and filing of legal documents with the courts and paroling authorities, on a prioritized basis, in accordance with these rules.

(2) Priority Access to Law Library Services and Equipment:

(a) Inmate access to law library services and equipment will be prioritized in the following order:

(A) Priority legal users with an imminent court deadline;

(B) General legal users with an imminent court deadline;

(C) Priority legal users without an imminent court deadline; and

(D) General legal users without an imminent court deadline.

(b) Library coordinators will consider whether the inmate has assigned legal counsel when determining priority within these categories.

(3) Submission of Access Request Form Required: In order to obtain access to law library services and equipment and necessary supplies, an inmate must submit to the library coordinator a written request using the appropriate access request forms.

(4) Inmates may be allowed a reasonable amount of time to do legal research and to prepare legal documents in the facility law library or in the inmate’s assigned cell or living unit.

(a) A special time allowance for research and preparation of legal documents using law library services and equipment may be granted to a legal user who demonstrates such a need with verification of an imminent court deadline.

(b) In the event of extended facility operational modifications library staff will prioritize access to law library services and equipment for inmates in the order described in subsection (2) above.

(5) Inmates received from other state or federal jurisdictions who are incarcerated in a Department of Corrections facility will be afforded access to law library services and equipment and necessary supplies in the same manner as Oregon inmates; however, the department will not be responsible for providing inmates with legal research materials specific to other state jurisdictions other than those materials that are regularly made available to Oregon inmates. These inmates must contact their respective state or federal corrections authorities to acquire state-specific materials.

(6) Oregon inmates who are incarcerated in a correctional facility located in another state or in a federal correctional facility may request access to Oregon-specific legal research materials and assistance from an assigned inmate legal assistant through correspondence directed to the library coordinator at the Oregon facility they were last housed. Such requests will be processed with reasonable diligence.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0130
Law Library Services

(1) Operations and Procedures:

(a) Each facility will post normal law library hours of operation.

(b) Work space will be provided for inmate use in all facility law libraries.

(c) Assigned legal assistants will be provided work space and access to computer equipment for research and word processing.

(d) Commissary items, personal property, and other items that are unrelated to legal research or preparation of legal documents are not permitted in facility law libraries.

(2) Legal Research Materials: Legal research materials in either electronic or hard copy form will be maintained for inmate use in facility law libraries.

(3) Legal Assistants: Library coordinators may assign a legal assistant to help guide and assist another inmate in legal research and in the preparation of legal documents using available computerized and hard copy resources under the supervision and direction of the library coordinator in accordance with these rules.

(4) Legal Forms:

(a) Legal forms that are made available in facility law libraries for use by priority legal users will be provided upon request.

(b) Other legal forms may be made available in facility law library for use by general legal users at the discretion of the library coordinator, with the approval of the functional unit manager and Central Library Administrator.

(c) The department does not warrant or make any representation regarding the suitability of any legal form made available for inmate use in the facility law libraries for a particular legal matter or application or regarding the legal effect of any legal form. Inmates who request and use such forms do so at their own legal risk.

(d) An inmate may request and obtain access from the department to only those legal forms that are made available for inmate use in the facility law library where the inmate is housed.

(5) Word Processing and Other Equipment:

(a) The department may, in its discretion, make word processing and other equipment available for inmate use for conducting legal research, preparing legal documents, and for reviewing personal court records and discovery.

(b) When made available for inmate use, word processing and other equipment and its use must conform to the standards set forth in the department’s rules on Inmate Access to Automation (OAR 291-086), law library operations for word processing and usage, and the provisions of OAR 291-139-0190(2).

(c) The department, in its discretion, may make available for inmate use in facility law libraries software used by state and federal courts and paroling authorities for reviewing audio and video recordings of official proceedings before courts and paroling authorities. Electronic material sent into the facility by a court, paroling authority or attorney must be compatible with the software provided in the facility law library. Refer to OAR 291-139-0190(3) for storage, control, and disposition of audio and video recordings of courts and paroling authorities.

(6) Supplies: Supplies (e.g. pencil, paper, envelopes) will be available for inmate use in the facility law library only for legal research and the preparation of legal documents. Envelopes for mailing legal documents are available for purchase from the facility commissary or, at the discretion of the facility, may be made available for purchase through the facility law library. Envelopes will only be provided to indigent inmates for necessary court filings.

(7) Notary Services: Notary services for the notarizing of legal documents will be provided to inmates when necessary without charge in accordance with posted schedules. The requesting inmate must show that a notary is required by the court or paroling authority.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0140
Special Housing Law Library Services

(1) Inmates assigned to special housing will be afforded reasonable access to law library services through intra-facility telephone and loan systems, satellite law library materials, computer equipment in or near the special housing unit or some combination therein.

(2) Inmates assigned to special housing who do not have direct access to computerized legal research materials or to print legal research materials sufficient for their needs may request access to duplicated copies of specific reported cases or other legal research materials by using standard request forms.

(a) All loaned legal material items must be returned to the facility law library within the specified time period for the loan.

(b) Requests for legal research materials will be limited to five materials per inmate at any one time.

(3) Inmates assigned to special housing will be permitted to communicate with library coordinators or inmate legal assistants concerning legal research questions through writing, phone, or in person on a schedule that is posted at the facility.

(4) Inmates assigned to special housing with an active case may request a limited and reasonable amount of supplies. Necessary supplies will be made available for inmate use in accordance with security guidelines for the unit where the inmate is housed. No more than 30 pages of paper will be provided per month to inmates in special housing units, unless the requesting inmate can substantiate the need for more.

(5) Notary services, photocopying, and mailing services for legal work may be requested in accordance with these rules using the standard request forms. Mail and photocopy requests must be accompanied by a Request for Withdrawal of Funds (CD28).

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0150
Library Coordinators

(1) Library coordinators are responsible for supervising facility legal libraries and the provision of law library services to inmates, including the activities of the assigned legal assistants.

(2) The library coordinator oversees the prioritization and assignment of legal services to an inmate, including the assignment of legal assistants.

(3) The library coordinator will track and manage the work of assigned legal assistants.

(4) The library coordinator may instruct inmates on how and where to access requested law library services and other resources, but may not offer advice or directly assist an inmate with their legal issues, case or matter.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0160
Legal Assistants

(1) Legal assistants are assigned to work in the facility law library by the library coordinator to help guide and assist other inmates in legal research and document preparation on a prioritized basis as assigned by the library coordinator. A minimum of one legal assistant will be assigned at each Department of Corrections facility that has a law library.

(2) Legal assistants may conduct legal research and prepare legal documents for another inmate only if the inmate is not capable of doing their own legal research and document preparation.

(3) Legal assistants may not discuss the details of another inmate’s legal work with other inmates.

(4) Legal assistants may not work for attorneys.

(5) Legal assistants may not charge or receive any form of compensation for assisting another inmate with legal work. Legal assistants who request or receive compensation for legal work are subject to discipline for violation of the department’s rules on Prohibited Inmate Conduct (OAR 291-105). Inmates found in violation of the rules of Prohibited Inmate Conduct related to their work in the library may be ineligible for future work assignment as a legal assistant.

(6) Legal assistants may be removed from their work assignment in a facility law library at the discretion of the functional unit manager or designee, in consultation with the Central Library Administrator, for misconduct or other behavior determined to be inconsistent with their work assignment as a legal assistant. Inmates removed from a work assignment as a legal assistant may be ineligible for consideration for future work assignment as a legal assistant.

(7) Possession of Another Inmate’s Legal Material:

(a) An inmate legal assistant may temporarily possess and store another inmate’s legal documents and other material in the facility law library for purposes of assisting the inmate with the approval of the library coordinator.

(b) The legal assistant must clearly label and store the inmate’s legal work in accordance with the library coordinator’s instructions.

(c) The legal assistant must return all legal documents and other materials belonging to the inmate upon the conclusion of the assistance or at the direction of the library coordinator. The legal assistant may not retain any copies (electronic or paper) of the inmate’s legal documents or other material.

(8) All files and documents prepared or compiled by the legal assistant, regardless of the form or format in which the file is created or maintained (i.e., computerized or hard copy), are subject to cursory review by the library coordinator, the library coordinator’s immediate supervisor, and by such other corrections staff as designated by the functional unit manager.

(9) Legal Assistant Eligibility Criteria and Selection:

(a) A GED or high school diploma, non-cash Incentive Level 2 or 3, and a genuine interest in helping inmates with their legal needs are required and determined by interviews conducted by the library coordinator or designated staff.

(b) Qualified applicants will be selected based on, but not limited to, their knowledge of the legal system, legal research abilities, legal writing skills, ability to communicate, and typing skills.

(10) Performance Recognition and Award System (PRAS) Awards: Assigned legal assistants are eligible to receive monthly performance awards in accordance with the department’s rules on Performance Recognition and Award System (OAR 291-077).

(11) Assignment and removal of inmate legal assistants by the library coordinator shall not be based upon retaliation for legitimate legal activities done in accordance with these rules.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0170
Print, Photocopy, and Mailing Services

(1) Printing and Photocopy Services:

(a) Printing and photocopy services will be made available to inmates in the facility law library for duplication of legal documents at the inmate's expense. An inmate must have sufficient funds in the inmate’s trust account to cover the costs of duplication at the time of a request.

(b) Costs for Printing or Photocopying: Inmates receiving printing or photocopying services will be charged at the rate of 10 cents per page.

(c) Cursory Review: All documents, prior to photocopy or printing, may receive a cursory review by the library coordinator or other supervising staff.

(d) Duplication of materials provided to the inmate by the court, paroling authority or attorney may be approved only for inmates who have sufficient funds to pay for copies.

(e) Crime scene images and other inflammatory material from an inmate’s criminal case will not be duplicated. Misuse of such material in violation of the department’s rules of Prohibited Inmate Conduct (OAR 291-105) may result in discipline or in confiscation of the material.

(f) All inmate requests for photocopies must be approved by the library coordinator or other supervising staff member. Only legal documents in final form that are ready to be filed with the court or paroling authority will be approved for photocopying. Approval will be provided for only that number of copies needed to satisfy court or paroling authority filing requirements as established by applicable rules and procedures, and one additional copy for retention by the inmate for the inmate’s personal records. If the library coordinator or other supervising staff have questions about copy requirements, the requesting inmate is responsible for providing staff with the citation to the applicable court or paroling authority rules and procedures.

(g) Copies of Non-Legal Documents: The library coordinator, in consultation with an immediate supervisor, may approve at the inmate’s expense photocopying of non-legal documents in the facility legal library when doing so serves a legitimate correctional, rehabilitative or programming need.

(2) Mailing Services:

(a) Mailing services (i.e., envelopes and postage) will be made available to inmates in facility law libraries for mailing legal documents at the inmate's expense as provided in these rules and in the department's rules on Mail (Inmate) (OAR 291-131).

(b) Electronic Filing of Legal Documents with a Court: Envelopes and postage will not be provided to inmates for filing of legal documents with a court if the department has entered into an agreement with the court for electronic filing of legal documents by inmates, and the court has provided for electronic filing as the exclusive means of filing legal documents with the court by inmates.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0180
Indigent Inmates

(1) Two categories of inmates will qualify for indigent status:

(a) A Priority Legal User who is without sufficient funds in the inmate’s trust account to pay for the costs of necessary supplies, photocopies and mailing services at the time of the request will be provided necessary supplies, photocopies, and mailing services notwithstanding the inmate’s indigent status in accordance with these rules.

(b) A General Legal User with an imminent Court Deadline who can demonstrate the inability to acquire funds or purchase necessary supplies or mailing services within the court deadline will be provided necessary supplies, photocopies and mailing services notwithstanding the inmate’s indigent status in accordance with these rules

(2) A General Legal User without sufficient funds in the inmate’s trust account to pay for the costs of necessary supplies, photocopies, and mailing services at the time of the request will not be provided necessary supplies, photocopies, and mailing services notwithstanding the inmate’s indigent status in accordance with these rules.

(3) Costs for any supplies, photocopies, and mailing services provided to indigent inmates will be charged to the requesting inmate’s trust account and collected as funds become available in accordance with the department’s rules on Trust Accounts (Inmate) (OAR 291-158).

(4) If the library coordinator or other supervising staff have questions about the inmate’s eligibility for indigent supplies, photocopies, or mailing services the inmate is responsible for providing staff with sufficient information to verify the inmate’s eligibility.

(5) Under these rules, sufficient envelopes and postage will be provided to mail out the original legal documents for filing with the court or paroling authority and for mailing out any required service copies.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17
291-139-0190
Storage, Control, and Disposition of Legal Materials

(1) General:

(a) Each inmate may possess and store their own legal materials as authorized by the department in accordance with the department's rules on Personal Property (Inmate) (OAR 291-117).

(b) Each inmate is responsible for maintaining custody of their own authorized legal materials except for those authorized legal materials that are maintained on digital or electronic storage media, which will be maintained in the facility law library.

(2) Removable Media Devices:

(a) The department, in its discretion, may make removable media devices available for inmate use for saving and storing legal documents created using word processing equipment in the facility law library.

(b) When made available by the department for inmate use, removable media devices that are owned by the department may be assigned to an inmate by the library coordinator. In order to receive authorization for assignment and use of a department-owned removable media device an inmate must agree to the terms and conditions of use set forth in a Removable Media Use Acknowledgment Statement (CD1761).

(c) An assigned removable media device may only be used by the inmate for the creation and storage of legal documents, and is subject to cursory review by the library coordinator and other correctional staff. Any material stored on an assigned removable media device that is not legal in nature, or which belongs to another inmate or pertains to another inmate’s legal affairs will be confiscated in accordance with the department’s rules on Personal Property (Inmate) (OAR 291-117). Misuse of removable media devices may result in loss of privileges.

(d) Assigned removable media devices will be securely stored in the facility law library or in another secure area designated by the functional unit manager or designee. Inmates may access their assigned removable media by checkout for use at an approved law library terminal.

(e) The use of removable media by inmates is governed by the department’s rules on Inmate Access to Automation (OAR 291-086) and the Removable Media Use Acknowledgment Statement (CD1761).

(3) Audio or Video Recordings of Court and Paroling Authority Hearings and Proceedings:

(a) Inmates in Department of Corrections facilities may be authorized by the library coordinator to access recordings of their official court and paroling authority hearings and proceedings sent in from the court, paroling authority, or the inmate’s attorney. Inmates can request access to those recordings by using the Law library Request Form for General Population (CD1714).

(b) Authorized audio or video recordings of hearings and proceedings sent into the facility from a court, paroling authority, or attorney will be securely stored in the law library.

(c) Authorized audio or video recordings hearings and proceedings sent into the facility from a court, paroling authority or attorney must be labeled to identify the inmate’s name and State Identification (“SID”) number, and the court and case caption and number that the records pertain to. The library coordinator may place additional labeling on electronic media sent in from a court, paroling authority, or the inmate’s attorney for purposes of storage and tracking.

(d) Authorized audio or video recordings of hearings and proceedings sent into the facility from a court, paroling authority, or the inmate’s attorney must be compatible with the media software made available for inmate use by the department. Any media that is not compatible with the department existing media software will be returned to the sender. Inmates are responsible for informing their attorney of department requirements.

(e) Only those inmates who are the subject of and a party to the court or paroling authority case or proceeding, or assigned legal assistants as requested by the inmate, will be authorized to review the audio or video recording of the court or paroling authority hearing or proceeding.

(4) Transfers Within the Department:

(a) Inmates who transfer to another Department of Corrections facility will have their legal property transferred with them.

(b) Electronic material stored on an assigned removable media device will be forwarded by the library coordinator or other supervising staff at the previous facility to the library coordinator at the receiving facility without charge to the inmate.

(5) Disposition of Legal Material:

(a) Department of Corrections staff will process the disposition of legal documents and materials in accordance with the provisions in the department's rules on Personal Property (Inmate) (OAR 291-117).

(b) Upon an inmate’s release from a Department of Corrections or other facility upon completion of the inmate incarceration term or sentence, or upon the death of an inmate, all stored legal materials of the inmate will be processed in accordance with the department’s rules on Personal Property (Inmate) (OAR 291-117.)

(c) Legal documents and other materials will be destroyed if department staff are unable to identify the inmate to which the materials belong in accordance with the rules on Personal Property (Inmate) (OAR 291-117).

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 14-2017, minor correction filed 10/23/2017, effective 10/23/2017
DOC 13-2017, f. 8-23-17, cert. ef. 9-1-17