Department of Corrections
Chapter 291
Division 205
VICTIM SERVICES PROGRAM
291-205-0010
Authority, Purpose and Policy

(1) Authority: The authority for these rules is granted to the Director of the Department of Corrections in accordance with ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, and 423.075 and 2017 Or Laws Ch 114.

(2) Purpose: The purpose of this rule is to further the Department of Correction’s mission, vision and core values by establishing policy and procedures for the operation and administration of the department’s Victim Services Program.

(3) Policy:

(a) The objective of the department’s Victim Services Program is to benefit and assist people who have been harmed by crime and to help inmates make amends or restitution for the harm caused by their crime.

(b) Within the inherent limitations of resources and the need to maintain facility security, safety, discipline, health and good order, it is the policy of the Department of Corrections to:

(A) Provide crime victims and survivors and concerned members of the general public with timely information about any changes in the incarceration status of department inmates, including an inmate’s physical release from a Department of Corrections facility, through the Victim Information and Notification Everyday Program (VINE);

(B) Permit victim-initiated facilitated dialogues between victims or survivors of serious and violent crimes and inmates in Department of Corrections facilities through the Facilitated Dialogue Program ;

(C) Provide other general services to crime victims and survivors and to inmates who are working to make amends and restitution for their crimes through the department’s Victim Services Program; and

(D) Collaborate with other agencies, people, and community organizations to assist crime victims and survivors, and inmates.

(c) Facilitated dialogues can promote justice and healing for crime victims or survivors and aid inmates in the process of their rehabilitation. When authorized by the functional unit manager or designee within the Victim Services Program, a facilitated dialogue is permitted neither as a matter of right nor as a privilege of a crime victim or survivor or an inmate. Rather, a facilitated dialogue is permitted by the functional unit manager or designee, in his or her sole discretion, when he or she judges the facilitated dialogue may further the correctional goals and mission of the department, and the healing process for crime victims or survivors. Such dialogues must always be consistent with the safe, secure, and orderly management and operation of the Department’s correctional facilities.

(d) In order for the Facilitated Dialogue Program to be successful, participants must be able to speak openly and honestly about the crime and its impact, knowing that what they communicate will not be shared with other people or used against them later, except as required by law. Accordingly, it is the policy of the Department of Corrections to maintain the confidentiality of all facilitated dialogue communications to the maximum extent permitted by law.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, 423.075 & 2017 Or Laws Ch 114
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0020
Definitions

(1) Crime Victim or Survivor:

(a) Any person who was subjected to direct harm or injury from a crime for which an inmate has been convicted, past or present, and is identified as a victim or survivor in records or information available to the Department of Corrections.

(b) Any spouse, significant other, domestic partner, parent, grandparent, guardian, sibling, child or other immediate family member, or any member of the household, or any other person who was impacted by the consequences of an inmate’s crime even though they were not directly or immediately harmed or injured by the inmate’s criminal conduct.

(c) Any person subjected to harm or injury from a crime for which an inmate has not been prosecuted or convicted, whereby the crime victim or survivor reported the crime to law enforcement or there is other information available to the Department of Corrections to identify the person as a crime victim of the inmate.

(2) Department of Corrections Facility: Any institution, facility or staff office, including the grounds, operated by the Department of Corrections.

(3) Facilitated Dialogue: A process in which facilitators assist crime victims or survivors and the inmates that victimized then to communicate on topics of the victim’s or survivor’s choosing. The facilitated dialogue includes all contacts between program staff, Victim Services Advisory Committee members, facilitators, victim or survivor, inmate, and support person, including, but not limited to, the initial case intake, preparations for a facilitated dialogue meeting[s], the meetings, and any post-dialogue meetings, or follow-up contacts with any of the above mentioned participants until the dialogue is terminated.

(4) Facilitated Dialogue Communications: All communications by a victim, survivor or inmate, or by a program facilitator, Victim Services Advisory Committee member or Facilitated Dialogue Program staff that are made in the course of or in connection with a facilitate dialogue conducted pursuant to these rules. The communications include but are not limited to:

(a) All memoranda, assessment and evaluation forms, documents and other materials, including letters that are prepared for or submitted in connection with a facilitated dialogue; and,

 

(b) All communications, whether oral, written or recorded, made during the intake of a case, during preparations for a facilitated dialogue, during any joint in-person meetings or telephone calls, and during any post-dialogue meetings or conversations.

(5) Facilitated Dialogue Meeting: One or more meetings between a crime victim or survivor and an inmate during which the crime victim or survivor and the inmate have the opportunity to dialogue about the crime and its impact with the support of trained facilitators. Meeting includes letter exchanges between the crime victim or survivor and inmate that may occur in lieu of a face-to-face meeting.

(6) Facilitated Dialogue Program (FDP): A Department of Corrections program that seeks to promote justice and healing for victims or survivors of serious and violent crimes and provide them with a safe and structured process to discuss the crime and its impact with the inmates that victimized them. The program also seeks to aid inmates in the process of their rehabilitation and as a way of increasing public safety. For the purposes of OAR 291-205-0010 to 291-205-0120 and unless specified otherwise, references to decisions, determinations or approvals of the Facilitated Dialogue Program shall mean a decision by the functional unit manager or designee.

(7) Functional Unit Manager: Any person within the Department of Corrections who reports to the Director, an Assistant Director or an administrator and has responsibility for the delivery of services or coordination of programs.

(8) Inmate: Any person under the supervision of Department of Corrections who is not on parole, post-prison supervision, or probation status.

(9) Program Facilitators: A Department of Corrections volunteer, contractor, or staff member who has had specific training in the Facilitated Dialogue Program procedure and practices, and who has been trained and approved by the functional unit manager to work in the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(10) Program Staff: A Department of Corrections employee who has had specific training in the Facilitated Dialogue Program procedure and practices, and who has been trained and approved by the functional unit manager to work in the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(11) Support Person: A person or persons chosen by the crime victim or survivor or inmate, and approved by Facilitated Dialogue Program, to assist them during the facilitated dialogue process.

(12) Victim Services Advisory Committee: A group of community-based professionals and community members from the fields of mediation, restorative justice, psychology, victim services, or other related fields and disciplines, selected by the functional unit manager or designee, who volunteer or otherwise provide their time and expertise to advise and assist the functional unit manager or designee in the conduct of the Victim Services Program.

(13) Victim Services Program Coordinator (VSPC): A department staff member or members designated by the functional unit manager who coordinates the Victim Services Programs including but not limited to Facilitated Dialogue Program, Victim Speakers Network, Case Companion, and VINE.

Statutory/Other Authority:  179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented:  179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 1-2016, f. & cert. ef. 1-21-16
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08; DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
291-205-0030
Victim Services Advisory Committee

(1) The Victim Services Advisory Committee will operate under the direction of the department’s designee.

(2) The Victim Services Advisory Committee will advise and assist the department’s designee with the recruitment, training, supervision and evaluation of Facilitated Dialogue Program facilitators; the development and the administration of the Facilitated Dialogue Program; the gathering of support and resources for the Facilitated Dialogue Program; and other elements of the Victim Services Program.

(3) The Victim Services Advisory Committee will also provide comment to the department’s designee regarding the department’s administrative rules governing the Victim Services Program, the Facilitated Dialogue Program, and individual facilitated dialogue processes.

Statutory/Other Authority:  179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 1-2016, f. & cert. ef. 1-21-16
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08; DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
291-205-0040
General Components of the Victim Notification and Information Everyday (VINE) Program

(1) Crime victims and survivors and concerned members of the general public may request timely information about any changes in the incarceration status of Department inmates, including an inmate’s physical release from a Department of Corrections facility, by registering to participate in the VINE program.

(2) The Victim Services Program Coordinator, in consultation with the Administrator of Religious Services will be responsible for coordinating and maintaining the VINE program.

(3) The Victim Services Program Coordinator may convene a meeting of VINE stakeholders at least once every two years to advise the Administrator of Religious Services or designee on issues relating to the operation of VINE.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0050
General Components of the Facilitated Dialogue Program

(1) Key principles or components that guide the Facilitated Dialogue Program:

(a) Participation in a facilitated dialogue case is voluntary both for the crime victim or survivor and for the inmate. A facilitated dialogue process can only be initiated by a crime victim or survivor.

(b) Professionally trained program facilitators with a background in related fields will conduct the facilitated dialogues, The facilitated dialogue process will be confidential, unless all parties agree in writing otherwise.

(c) Pre-dialogue preparation, including careful screening of parties to ensure safety and identify appropriate support networks, is a critical part of the facilitated dialogue process and can take months or even years to complete. Post-dialogue follow-up is essential to a successful process and could include assistance in accessing appropriate aftercare and therapeutic support. On-going evaluation of the dialogue process, program facilitators and overall program policies and procedures is critical to ensuring a quality process for the parties involved.

(2) Crime victim or survivor requests and initiates:

(a) A crime victim or survivor must request to participate in the Facilitated Dialogue Program. Such a request initiates the dialogue. Inmate requests for a facilitated dialogue will not be considered by the department, except to the extent that they will be kept on file by the department in the event that an inmate’s crime victim or survivor contacts the program.

(b) Crime victim or survivor requests will be considered only in relation to those crimes for which the inmate has exhausted or elected not to pursue all appeals, Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision administrative actions, and other legal remedies that are available to challenge the validity of the inmate’s conviction and sentence.

(c) Crime victim or survivor requests may be considered for harms resulting from non-adjudicated crimes if all other eligibility criteria are met.

(3) Participation in a facilitated dialogue is completely voluntary by all participants. All participants in the program and process, the crime victim or survivor, inmate, support persons, staff, or program facilitators may suspend their participation in the program or in a particular facilitated dialogue process at any time for any reason.

(4) Upon request participants must consent to disclosure of mental health information:

(a) As a requirement of program participation, the crime victim or survivor and the inmate may be asked to consent in writing to the disclosure of information related to their current psychological state, emotional strengths and weaknesses, predisposition to violence, including but not limited to any DSM-V diagnoses, to any program staff, program facilitators, or advisory committee members involved in their particular facilitated dialogue. The information will be used only to evaluate the appropriateness of the crime victim’s or survivor’s and the inmate’s participation in the program.

(b) The crime victim or survivor or inmate may withdraw their consent to disclosure of their mental health information at any time in the facilitated dialogue by delivering a written revocation to the program staff or program facilitators involved in conducting a dialogue. Such a revocation by either the crime victim or survivor or the inmate may result in the Victim Services Program coordinator taking steps to terminate the facilitated dialogue. The consent to disclosure of mental health information shall be limited in scope to the specific needs of a facilitated dialogue.

(c) The consent to disclosure of mental health information shall automatically terminate upon termination of the facilitated dialogue.

(5) The Facilitated Dialogue Program is not designed to be a replacement for professional counseling or therapy for any of the participants. Participants are encouraged to consult with a professional counselor or therapist to address any personal emotional or mental health issues.

(6) Facilitated Dialogue Participation Agreements: As a requirement of program participation any crime victim, survivor, inmate, program facilitators, support and other persons who will be involved in the dialogue process must enter into and agree to abide by the terms and conditions of program participation as set forth in a Participation Agreement and Facilitated Dialogue Confidentiality Agreement that will be prepared by the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(7) Suspension/Termination of a Facilitated Dialogue Process:

(a) Program facilitators and Victim Services Advisory Committee members will immediately suspend a facilitated dialogue by having no contact with the victim, survivor, or inmate upon a decision being made by the functional unit manager or designee that there has been a violation or failure to abide by Victim Services Program rules or agreements for any reason by any participant.

(b) If a facilitated dialogue is suspended, the crime victim or survivor and the inmate are prohibited from contacting each other while the process is suspended without the prior express approval of the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(c) Termination: The Facilitated Dialogue Program may terminate a facilitated dialogue process, including a process that has been suspended, for any reason. The Facilitated Dialogue Program decision is final, and not subject to further review by the crime victim or survivor or by the inmate.

Statutory/Other Authority:  179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 1-2016, f. & cert. ef. 1-21-16
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08; DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
291-205-0060
Crime Victim or Survivor and their Support Persons Participation in a Facilitated Dialogue

(1) A crime victim or survivor who wishes to participate in the Facilitated Dialogue Program must:

(a) Act in “good faith” during the facilitated dialogue, this means that participants will be honest with and respectful of one another and the guidelines of the program. Participants will accept and follow the program facilitators’ direction over the course of the process.

(b) Refrain from engaging in inappropriate personal relationships that go beyond the focus area or the purpose and function of the facilitated dialogue with the participants or facilitators. Any conflict of interests with participants and program facilitators that may exist or develop over the course of the dialogue process will be reported the Victim Services Program coordinator.

(2) The Facilitated Dialogue Program encourages, but does not require that a crime victim or survivor participating in a facilitated dialogue process choose a support person. All support persons chosen by the crime victim or survivor shall disclose to the program the nature of the support person’s relationship to the crime victim or survivor, and to the inmate, if any.

(3) Facilitated dialogues take place inside Department of Corrections facilities. Consequently, the crime victim or survivor and support person are and remain subject to all applicable department rules and facility procedures pertaining to the public and visitors in Department of Corrections facilities, while participating in a facilitated dialogue, including but not limited to Mail (Inmate) (OAR 291-137), Visiting (291-127), Facility Access (291-016), and these rules (OAR 291-205).

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0070
Inmate and their Support Persons Participation in a Facilitated Dialogue

(1) An inmate who wishes to participate in a facilitated dialogue must:

(a) Consent to a psychiatric/mental health assessment for the purpose of evaluating their suitability to participate in a facilitated dialogue with the crime victim or survivor;

(b) Acknowledge guilt and take responsibility for his or her crime, and be willing to respond to the crime victim’s or survivor’s needs to the satisfaction of the program staff and facilitators;

(c) Act in “good faith” during the facilitated dialogue and accept and follow the facilitators’ direction over the course of the facilitated dialogue; and

(d) Refrain from engaging in inappropriate personal relationships with the participants or facilitators of a facilitated dialogue.

(2) Facilitated dialogues take place inside the Department of Corrections facilities. Consequently, the inmates and support persons are and remain subject to all applicable department rules and facility procedures pertaining to the public and visitors in Department of Corrections facilities, while participating in the Facilitated Dialogue Program including but not limited to Mail (inmate) (OAR 291-137), Visiting (291-127), Facility Access (291-016), and these rules (OAR 291-205).

(3) If an inmate is found in violation of any official misconduct during a facilitated dialogue, the department’s designee, after consultation with the Victim Services Program coordinator and the Victim Services Advisory Committee, may decide that the facilitated dialogue should be suspended for a time or terminated.

(4) An inmate’s participation in the Facilitated Dialogue Program will not affect the inmate’s sentence or status within the correctional facility.

(a) Participation in the Facilitated Dialogue Program will not be assigned or evaluated as part of the inmate’s Oregon Corrections Plan for purposes of the Performance Recognition and Awards System (OAR 291-077) or any earned good time.

(b) Inmates will not receive any benefit because of their participation in the Facilitated Dialogue Program other than any benefits that are inherent to their participation.

(5) The Facilitated Dialogue Program encourages, but does not require, that an inmate participating in a facilitated dialogue choose a support person. All support persons chosen by the inmate must be DOC staff or volunteers and will be required to disclose to the program the nature of the support person’s relationship to the inmate, if any.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0080
Facilitated Dialogue Program Facilitator Participation

(1) Facilitator Qualification, Selection, Assignment, Supervision, and Termination:

(a) The functional unit manager and designee maintain sole discretion over the qualifications, selection, assignment, and termination of program facilitators who participate in the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(b) The Victim Services Program coordinator will assign program facilitators to a specific facilitated dialogue as needed.

(c) The Victim Services Program coordinator will provide direction and supervision of all program facilitators assigned to cases and instruction as to appropriate intervals for debriefings.

(d) The Victim Services Program coordinator may terminate a program facilitator’s participation in a specific facilitated dialogue for any reason.

(2) Volunteer facilitators must meet the requirements for volunteer service in the rules on Volunteer Services/Student Interns (OAR 291-015). Facilitators must report any violation or failure to abide by the Facilitated Dialogue Program rules or agreements for any reason by any participant to the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(3) Program facilitators are prohibited from engaging in sexual or other inappropriate personal relationships with the participants of a facilitated dialogue.

(4) Program facilitators must not give legal advice to any crime victim or survivor or inmate.

(5) Facilitated dialogues take place inside Department of Corrections facilities. Consequently, program facilitators are and remain subject to all applicable department rules and facility procedures pertaining to the public and visitors in Department of Corrections facilities, while participating in the Facilitated Dialogue Program, including but not limited to Volunteer Services/Student Interns (OAR 291-015), Mail (Inmate) (291-137), Visiting (291-127), Facility Access (291-016), and these rules (OAR 291-205).

(6) Applicants seeking to become program facilitators must have completed a department-designated training. The Facilitated Dialogue Program may also offer on-going training and program updates and program facilitators are expected to make every effort to attend these activities.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0090
Facilitated Dialogue Intake Assessment

(1) Intake evaluation: Upon receiving a crime victim’s or survivor’s request to participate in the Facilitated Dialogue Program, the program will evaluate the request and determine whether the Facilitated Dialogue Program is appropriate for the crime victim or survivor and the inmate.

(2) Minimum content of evaluation: When conducting the intake assessment, the Facilitated Dialogue Program through its staff, program facilitators or advisory committee members will, at a minimum, do the following:

(a) Interview the crime victim or survivor to describe the process, determine the nature of the crime, time elapsed since the crime, and other factors that address the past and present impacts of the crime on the crime victim or survivor and why the crime victim or survivor wants to participate in the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(b) Contact appropriate staff at the institution where the inmate is incarcerated to determine if the inmate is eligible to participate. Program staff or volunteers designated by the Victim Services Program will conduct a preliminary interview with the inmate.

(c) Provide the inmate and the crime victim or survivor with copies of the confidentiality agreement and agreements to participate. Execution of these agreements is necessary before the facilitated dialogue will continue.

(3) The decision whether to grant a crime victim’s or survivor’s request to participate in a facilitated dialogue is at the discretion of the Facilitated Dialogue Program. The Facilitated Dialogue Program decision is final, and not subject to further review by the crime victim or survivor or by the inmate.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0100
Facilitated Dialogue Meeting

(1) A facilitated dialogue may include one or more facilitated dialogue meetings. A facilitated dialogue meeting offers the crime victim or survivor and the inmate the opportunity to discuss the crime and its impacts.

(2) When the Facilitated Dialogue Program has authorized a facilitated dialogue meeting, the functional unit manager or designee may in his or her discretion approve a special visit or visits between the crime victim or survivor and the inmate for the purpose of the facilitated dialogue meeting as an exception to the department’s general rule prohibiting visits between an inmate and his or her crime victim, OAR 291-127-0230.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0110
Facilitated Dialogue Post-Meeting Process

(1) After the facilitated dialogue meeting, a facilitator will contact the crime victim or survivor and the inmate to discuss the meeting and evaluate the process. The contact should take place within 72 hours after the facilitated dialogue meeting and thereafter as approved by the Facilitated Dialogue Program.

(2) After the facilitated dialogue meeting, a program facilitator will report to the Facilitated Dialogue Program. The Facilitated Dialogue Program may use the report to evaluate the facilitated dialogue and the program.

(3) Upon conclusion of the post-meeting contacts and reports, a facilitated dialogue is terminated.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary amend filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
DOC 26-2008, f. & cert. ef. 10-6-08
DOC 12-2008(Temp). F. & cert. ef. 5-15-08 thru 11-10-08
291-205-0120
Confidentiality of Facilitated Dialog Communications, Exceptions

(1) The words and phrases used in this rule have the same meaning as given to them in 2017 Or Laws Ch 114.

(2) Except as provided in section (3) of this rule, facilitated dialogue communications are confidential and:

(a) Shall not be disclosed to any other person;

(b) Shall not be disclosed during discovery in any subsequent administrative, judicial or arbitration proceeding:

(c) Shall not be admissible as evidence in any subsequent administrative, judicial or arbitration proceeding; and,

(d) No program facilitator, advisory committee member, or Facilitated Dialogue Program staff person shall be compelled to testify or produce evidence concerning a facilitated dialogue communication.

(3) Exceptions to confidentiality and inadmissibility:

(a) Any document that was prepared for purposes other than the Facilitated Dialogue Program and is a public record as defined in ORS 192.410 remains subject to disclosure to the extent provided by ORS 192.410 to 192.505 and may be introduced into evidence in a subsequent proceeding.

(b) A facilitated dialogue communication is not confidential and may be disclosed by any person receiving the communication to the extent that person reasonably believes that disclosing the communication is necessary to prevent the commission of a crime that is likely to result in death or bodily injury to any person.

(c) The victim, survivor, inmate, and facilitators in a facilitated dialogue may agree in writing that all or part of a facilitated dialogue communication is not confidential and may be disclosed or introduced into evidence in a subsequent proceeding, unless the substance of the communication is confidential, privileged, or otherwise prohibited from disclosure under state or federal law.

(d) A victim, survivor, inmate, or facilitator may disclose a facilitated dialogue communication to a person if the communication with that person is privileged under ORS Chapter 40 or other provision of law.

(e) A victim, survivor, inmate, or program facilitator may disclose facilitated dialogue communications to a person for the purpose of obtaining advice or support for the facilitated dialogue, if the victim, survivor, inmate, program facilitator, and the functional unit manager or designee agree.

(f) A facilitated dialogue staff person may disclose facilitated dialogue communications to a Department of Corrections employee to the extent that the disclosure is necessary to conduct authorized activities of the department. A Department of Corrections employee receiving a facilitated dialogue communication may re-disclose the communication only to the extent necessary to conduct those authorized activities.

(g) A written facilitated dialogue communication may be disclosed or introduced as evidence in a subsequent proceeding at the discretion of the victim, crime survivor, or inmate who prepared the communication so long as the communication is not otherwise confidential under state or federal law and does not contain confidential information from a facilitator or another participant who does not agree to the disclosure.

(h) Any facilitated dialogue communication relating to child abuse that is made to a person required to report child abuse under ORS 419B.010 is not confidential to the extent that the person is required to report the communication.

(i) Any facilitated dialogue communication relating to elder abuse that is made to a person who is required to report elder abuse under ORS 124.050 to 124.095 is not confidential to the extent that the person is required to report the communication.

(j) Any facilitated dialogue communication relating to abuse of adults with developmental disabilities who are currently receiving services from a community program or facility or were previously determined eligible for services or adults with mental illness who are receiving services from a community program or facility made to a person who is required to report abuse of those adults under ORS 430.765 is not confidential to the extent that the person is required to report the communication.

(k) A facilitated dialogue communication made to a program facilitator, Victim Services Advisory Committee member, or Victim Services Program coordinator may be disclosed and may be admitted into evidence to the extent the Department Director or the functional unit manager determines that disclosure of the communication is necessary to prevent or mitigate a serious danger to institutional security or the public's health or safety, and the communication is not otherwise confidential or privileged under state or federal law.

(l) The names of the participants in a facilitated dialogue, the facilitator names and the case number associated with that case are not confidential, may be disclosed and may be admissible in a subsequent proceeding.

(m) The Department of Corrections may use or disclose facilitated dialogue communications for reporting, research, training, or educational purposes subject to the following:

(A) The department may compile and disclose general statistical information concerning facilitated dialogues if the information does not contain information that would likely reveal the identities of the dialogue participants.

(B) Program staff may use or disclose facilitated dialogue communications or the disposition of matters referred for dialogue to another person for use in research, training, or educational purposes if the communications are used or disclosed in a manner that would not allow that information to be associated with a specific participant or reveal the identity of a participant.

(C) A program facilitator may disclose a facilitated dialogue communication and such disclosures may be admissible in any subsequent administrative, judicial or arbitration proceeding only to the extent that the victim, survivor, inmate, and the functional unit manager or designee agree in writing to the disclosure. The facilitator may disclose the communication only to the extent authorized in the agreement.

(4) The department intends this rule to apply retroactively to facilitated dialogue communications occurring on or after the effective date of 2017 Or Laws Ch 114.

Statutory/Other Authority: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 19-2017, temporary adopt filed 11/20/2017, effective 11/20/2017 through 05/18/2018
https://secure.sos.state.or.us/oard/viewReceiptPDF.action?filingRsn=35784