Department of Corrections
Chapter 291
Division 207
CORRECTIONAL CASE MANAGEMENT
291-207-0005
Authority, Purpose and Policy

(1) Authority: The authority for this rule is granted to the Director of the Department of Corrections in accordance with ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, and 423.075.

(2) Purpose: To provide uniform business practices in accordance with best practices in case management of inmates in a correctional environment from the time of intake through reentry to the community.

(3) Policy: It is the policy of the Department of Corrections to target resources to those inmates who are most likely to recidivate using the Oregon Accountability Model and evidence-based practices, in a multi-disciplinary case management approach from admission to release.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0010
Definitions

(1) Automated Criminal Risk Score (ACRS): A statistical calculation developed by the department’s Research Section to predict an offender’s risk of re-offending within three years of release.

(2) Case Management: A proactive, collaborative, multi-disciplinary process which assesses, plans, implements, coordinates, monitors and evaluates options and services to meet an individual’s need or risks, a well as responsivity factors. Case management is the process which links all the elements involved in an inmate’s management. The process of case management unifies procedures and personnel to balance departmental resources and an inmate’s needs through his/her term of incarceration and community supervision.

(3) Evidence Based Practices (EBP): The body of research and clinical knowledge that describes correctional assessment, programming and supervision strategies that lead to improved correctional outcomes such as the rehabilitation of inmates and increased public safety. Such principles only meet the public’s expectations for economical business strategies, efficiency and effectiveness but also reflect fairness and accountability.

(4) Multi-disciplinary Team: Stakeholders from different divisions within a functional unit who come together to provide comprehensive assessment, consultation and perspectives concerning an inmate’s incarceration and successful reentry to the community.

(5) Oregon Accountability Model: A plan composed of six components that is designed to strengthen the department’s ability to hold inmates accountable for their actions and department staff accountable for achieving the mission and vision of the department.

(6) Reentry: The activities and programming conducted to prepare inmates to return safely to the community and to live as law abiding citizens. Reentry includes the release process, the flow of inmates back into communities and how they are supervised after release, the effects on public safety as a result, how the Department of Corrections manages releases, and what communities can do to absorb and reintegrate returning offenders.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0015
General Guidelines

(1) The department will utilize case management strategies, in conjunction with the Oregon Accountability Model in order to involve all employees in managing inmates to reinforce the department mission to hold inmates accountable for their actions and reduce the risk of future criminal behavior.

(2) Correctional Case Management will be used to coordinate with all other institution business units to provide appropriate work, housing, educational, programmatic, and transitional interventions to determine the inmate’s case planning and supervision throughout the inmate’s incarceration.

(3) Correctional Case Management will provide the framework for responsible management of inmate placements and transition, in support of evidence-based practices for case planning.

(4) The Correctional Case Management approach will be used to approve inmate transfers from one institution to another, based on a holistic correctional programming approach that facilitates each individual inmate’s rehabilitation.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0020
Admission

(1) Inmates who have been sentenced to the Department of Corrections or who have violated their parole and post-prison supervision will be committed to the Intake Center located at Coffee Creek Correctional Facility, except for (a) and (b) below.

(a) Male inmates sentenced to death are routed to the Oregon State Penitentiary special housing unit. Female inmates sentenced to death are routed to Coffee Creek Correctional Facility special housing unit.

(b) Male inmates that require intensive confinement or where special medical or mental health care is essential may be routed to an approved DOC facility other than the Intake Center.

(2) The intake process will generally be completed with a 30-day period.

(a) All inmates will receive an initial classification to determine custody level.

(b) All inmates will be assessed and evaluated to set a basic level of service, based upon assessed criminal risk factors and need.

(c) All inmates will receive an automated criminal risk score (ACRS) to determine initial case planning and supervision level assignment.

(d) Inmates will be assigned to an institution or housing unit based upon their correctional needs upon completion of the inmate assessment.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0025
Correctional Case Management

(1) Correctional Case Management is a shared responsibility of all DOC employees, contractors and volunteers in the day-to-day interaction of managing inmates and through a multi-disciplinary approach in support of the key components of the Oregon Accountability Model.

(2) Case planning begins and is continuously assessed as the inmate transfers between institutions based upon the inmate’s correctional needs. The inmate’s primary institution counselor is responsible to develop, document and monitor the inmate’s needs and corresponding resources to address those needs, along with timelines including forecasting custody classification changes and subsequent facility transfers for provisions of interventions and housing management as outlined in the policy on Correctional Case Management (90.1.3).

(3) Supervision levels will be determined by the relative frequency and intensity of interventions, contact, and available services needed to ensure productive incarceration and successful reentry.

(4) Resources will be targeted to inmates most likely to recidivate based on assessed criminal risk factors and need.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0030
Release

(1) Correctional Case Management is used to prepare an inmate for reentry into the community. This includes release preparation, reentry programming, community responsibilities, supervision responsibilities, family support, employment readiness and barriers to successful reentry.

(2) The department will make every effort to secure identification records, such as birth certificates, social security cards, and Department of Motor Vehicles photo identification cards, for all inmates prior to release.

(3) In preparation for release, the department will provide inmates with:

(a) Verification of the inmate’s work history while in the custody of the department.

(b) Certification of any educational programs completed by the inmate while in the custody of the department.

(c) Certification of any treatment programs completed by the inmate while in the custody of the department.

(4) Prior to an inmate’s projected release date, a release counselor will begin preparation of an inmate’s release plan.

(a) Release counselors will collaborate with other department stakeholders, outside agencies and contacts to formulate the inmate’s release plan.

(b) Release counselors will recommend conditions of supervision to the Board of Parole and Post Prison Supervision who will subsequently order the conditions of release for an inmate.

(c) Release counselors and transitions coordinators will assist inmates in developing a release plan that may include identifying the releasing residence, transportation from the institution, potential support, community resources, etc., to prepare for reentry.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030 & 423.075
History:
DOC 16-2011, f. & cert. ef. 8-15-11
291-207-0100
DMV/DOC Program for an Inmate Obtaining a Driver License or Identification Card Prior to Release

(1) The Oregon Department of Transportation, Driver and Motor Vehicle Services Division (DMV) and the Oregon Department of Corrections (DOC) have established, through interagency agreement, the following program to help an inmate obtain a driver license or identification card prior to his or her release from custody.

(2) For purposes of this rule, the term “inmate” means any person under the supervision of the DOC and who is not on parole, probation or post-prison supervision status.

(3) Notwithstanding OAR 735-062-0016, DMV may issue a renewal or replacement driver license or an identification card containing the last photograph of the inmate on file with DMV. The photograph on file must not be older than nine years and two months. DMV will issue as follows:

(a) A replacement driver license to an inmate whose driving privileges are valid or are reinstated at the time of issuance;

(b) A renewal driver license to an inmate whose driving privileges are valid or are reinstated at the time of issuance and whose driver license is within the allotted time for early renewal as described in OAR 735-062-0090(4) or has been expired for less than one year; or

(c) An original, renewal or replacement identification card to an inmate:

(A) Who is not eligible for driving privileges under sections (4), (7) or (8) of this rule;

(B) Whose previous driver license has been expired for more than one year;

(C) Whose driving privileges are suspended, revoked or cancelled; or

(D) Who has never been issued or does not currently qualify for a driver license under ORS 807.040.

(4) DMV will make an inquiry to the National Driver Register/Problem Driver Pointer System (NDR/PDPS) and the Commercial Driver License Information System (CDLIS), to determine if the inmate’s driving privileges are suspended, revoked, cancelled or otherwise not valid in any other jurisdiction. An inmate whose driving privileges are not valid in any other jurisdiction is not eligible to replace or renew driving privileges in Oregon.

(5) DOC may complete an application packet for each eligible inmate within no more than 180 days prior to the inmate’s date of release from DOC custody. The application packet must include:

(a) A completed Valid with Previous Photo DL/ID Card (VWPP) Application, DMV Form 735-171C, signed by the inmate. The application must include the inmate’s Social Security Number (SSN). DMV must verify, or have previously verified, the SSN with the Social Security Administration, as required by OAR 735-062-0005;

(b) Proof of legal name as required by OAR 735-062-0014;

(c) Proof of legal presence as required by OAR 735-062-0015 and the interagency agreement; and

(d) Proof of date of birth and identity as required by OAR 735-062-0020.

(6) On the application DOC must certify:

(a) That the copies of the documents submitted to meet the requirements of section (5) of this rule are true copies of the original documents and that the documents pertain to the inmate for whom DOC is submitting the VWPP application; and

(b) That the inmate will be living in Oregon when released and the address provided on the application meets the requirements for residence or mailing address as outlined in the interagency agreement.

(7) An inmate is not eligible for driving privileges, under ORS 807.060(4) or (5), and DMV will not replace or renew a driver license, if on the VWPP Application the inmate:

(a) Answers yes to the question “Do you have a vision condition or impairment that has not been corrected by glasses, contacts or surgery that affects your ability to drive safely?”;

(b) Answers yes to the question “Do you have any physical or mental conditions or impairments that affect your ability to drive safely?”; or

(c) Answers yes to the question “Do you use alcohol, inhalants, or controlled substances to a degree that affects your ability to drive safely?”

(8) An inmate who is eligible to renew his or her driving privileges, and is or will be 50 years of age or older at the time his or her driving privileges expire, must meet the requirements of OAR 735-062-0060. As the inmate will not be at a DMV field office for the vision screening, DOC must provide a vision examination form, Certificate of Vision, DMV Form 735-24, completed by a licensed ophthalmologist or optometrist with the VWPP application. If no Certificate of Vision form is included or the inmate does not meet the vision standards set forth in OAR 735-062-0050, the inmate is only eligible for an identification card.

(9) When an inmate’s driving privileges are valid (not suspended, revoked, cancelled or expired more than one year) the inmate must surrender driving privileges in order to be eligible for an identification card. A completed Surrender of Driving Privilege(s), DMV Form 735-7206, must be included with the VWPP application of any inmate who is surrendering driving privileges. A person who surrenders driving privileges must pass all tests and pay all fees associated with an original driver license to regain driving privileges at a later date.

(10) DOC will pay the fee listed in ORS 807.370 or 807.410, as appropriate, for each inmate issued a driver license or identification card in a manner outlined in the interagency agreement.

(11) When an inmate’s driver license or identification card issued pursuant to this rule is renewed or replaced, he or she must provide proof of citizenship or permanent legal residency as required by OAR 735-062-0015, unless DMV records show the person has previously provided such proof.

Statutory/Other Authority: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, 423.075 & 802.087
Statutes/Other Implemented: ORS 179.040, 423.020, 423.030, 423.075 & 802.087
History:
DOC 10-2015, f. & cert. ef. 8-21-15
DOC 12-2012, f. 12-27-12, cert. ef. 1-1-13