# ORS 243.650 to 243.782

## Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782

As used in ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), unless the context requires otherwise:

1. **“Appropriate bargaining unit”** means the unit designated by the Employment Relations Board or voluntarily recognized by the public employer to be appropriate for collective bargaining. However, an appropriate bargaining unit may not include both academically licensed and unlicensed or nonacademically licensed school employees. Academically licensed units may include but are not limited to teachers, nurses, counselors, therapists, psychologists, child development specialists and similar positions. This limitation does not apply to any bargaining unit certified or recognized prior to June 6, 1995, or to any school district with fewer than 50 employees. 
2. **“Board”** means the Employment Relations Board. 
3. **“Certification”** means official recognition by the board that a labor organization is the exclusive representative for all of the employees in the appropriate bargaining unit. 
4. **“Collective bargaining”** means the performance of the mutual obligation of a public employer and the representative of its employees to meet at reasonable times and confer in good faith with respect to employment relations for the purpose of negotiations concerning mandatory subjects of bargaining, to meet and confer in good faith in accordance with law with respect to any dispute concerning the interpretation or application of a collective bargaining agreement, and to execute written contracts incorporating agreements that have been reached on behalf of the public employer and the employees in the bargaining unit covered by such negotiations. The obligation to meet and negotiate does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or require the making of a concession. This subsection may not be construed to prohibit a public employer and a certified or recognized representative of its employees from discussing or executing written agreements regarding matters other than mandatory subjects of bargaining that are not prohibited by law as long as there is mutual agreement of the parties to discuss these matters, which are permissive subjects of bargaining. 
5. **“Compulsory arbitration”** means the procedure whereby parties involved in a labor dispute are required by law to submit their differences to a third party for a final and binding decision. 
6. **“Confidential employee”** means one who assists and acts in a confidential capacity to a person who formulates, determines and effectuates management policies in the area of collective bargaining. 
7. **\(a\) “Employment relations”** includes, but is not limited to, matters concerning direct or indirect monetary benefits, hours, vacations, sick leave, grievance procedures and other conditions of employment.  **\(b\) “Employment relations”** does not include subjects determined to be permissive, nonmandatory subjects of bargaining by the Employment Relations Board prior to June 6, 1995.  **\(c\) After June 6, 1995, “employment relations”** does not include subjects that the Employment Relations Board determines to have a greater impact on management’s prerogative than on employee wages, hours, or other terms and conditions of employment.  **\(d\) “Employment relations”** does not include subjects that have an insubstantial or de minimis effect on public employee wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment.  **\(e\) For school district bargaining, “employment relations”** excludes class size, the school or educational calendar, standards of performance or criteria for evaluation of teachers, the school curriculum, reasonable dress, grooming and at-work personal conduct requirements respecting smoking, gum chewing and similar matters of personal conduct, the standards and procedures for student discipline, the time between student classes, the selection, agendas and decisions of 21st Century Schools Councils established under ORS [329.704 \(Local 21st Century Schools Councils\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/329.704), requirements for expressing milk under ORS [653.077 \(Expressing milk in workplace\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/653.077), and any other subject proposed that is permissive under paragraphs \(b\), \(c\) and \(d\) of this subsection.  **\(f\)** For employee bargaining involving employees covered by **ORS** [**243.736 \(Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel\)**](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.736) **and employees of the Department of Corrections** who have direct contact with inmates, “employment relations” includes safety issues that have an impact on the on-the-job safety of the employees or staffing levels that have a significant impact on the on-the-job safety of the employees.  **\(g\) For all other employee bargaining except school district bargaining and except as provided in paragraph \(f\) of this subsection, “employment relations”** excludes staffing levels and safety issues \(except those staffing levels and safety issues that have a direct and substantial effect on the on-the-job safety of public employees\), scheduling of services provided to the public, determination of the minimum qualifications necessary for any position, criteria for evaluation or performance appraisal, assignment of duties, workload when the effect on duties is insubstantial, reasonable dress, grooming, and at-work personal conduct requirements respecting smoking, gum chewing, and similar matters of personal conduct at work, and any other subject proposed that is permissive under paragraphs \(b\), \(c\) and \(d\) of this subsection. 
8. **“Exclusive representative”** means the labor organization that, as a result of certification by the board or recognition by the employer, has the right to be the collective bargaining agent of all employees in an appropriate bargaining unit. 
9. **“Fact-finding”** means identification of the major issues in a particular labor dispute by one or more impartial individuals who review the positions of the parties, resolve factual differences and make recommendations for settlement of the dispute. 
10. **“Fair-share agreement”** means an agreement between the public employer and the recognized or certified bargaining representative of public employees whereby employees who are not members of the employee organization are required to make an in-lieu-of-dues payment to an employee organization except as provided in ORS [243.666 \(Certified or recognized labor organization as exclusive employee group representative\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.666). Upon the filing with the board of a petition by 30 percent or more of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit covered by such union security agreement declaring they desire that the agreement be rescinded, the board shall take a secret ballot of the employees in the unit and certify the results thereof to the recognized or certified bargaining representative and to the public employer. Unless a majority of the votes cast in an election favor the union security agreement, the board shall certify deauthorization of the agreement. A petition for deauthorization of a union security agreement must be filed not more than 90 calendar days after the collective bargaining agreement is executed. Only one such election may be conducted in any appropriate bargaining unit during the term of a collective bargaining agreement between a public employer and the recognized or certified bargaining representative. 
11. **“Final offer”** means the proposed contract language and cost summary submitted to the mediator within seven days of the declaration of impasse. 
12. **“Labor dispute”** means any controversy concerning employment relations or concerning the association or representation of persons in negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to arrange terms or conditions of employment relations, regardless of whether the disputants stand in the proximate relation of employer and employee. 
13. **“Labor organization”** means any organization that has as one of its purposes representing employees in their employment relations with public employers. 
14. **“Last best offer package”** means the offer exchanged by parties not less than 14 days prior to the date scheduled for an interest arbitration hearing. 
15. **“Legislative body”** means the Legislative Assembly, the city council, the county commission and any other board or commission empowered to levy taxes. 
16. **“Managerial employee”** means an employee of the State of Oregon or a public university listed in ORS [352.002 \(Public universities\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/352.002) who possesses authority to formulate and carry out management decisions or who represents management’s interest by taking or effectively recommending discretionary actions that control or implement employer policy, and who has discretion in the performance of these management responsibilities beyond the routine discharge of duties. A “managerial employee” need not act in a supervisory capacity in relation to other employees. Notwithstanding this subsection, “managerial employee” does not include faculty members at a community college, college or university. 
17. **“Mediation”** means assistance by an impartial third party in reconciling a labor dispute between the public employer and the exclusive representative regarding employment relations. 
18. **“Payment-in-lieu-of-dues”** means an assessment to defray the cost for services by the exclusive representative in negotiations and contract administration of all persons in an appropriate bargaining unit who are not members of the organization serving as exclusive representative of the employees. The payment must be equivalent to regular union dues and assessments, if any, or must be an amount agreed upon by the public employer and the exclusive representative of the employees. 
19. **“Public employee”** means an employee of a public employer but does not include elected officials, persons appointed to serve on boards or commissions, incarcerated persons working under section 41, Article I of the Oregon Constitution, or persons who are confidential employees, supervisory employees or managerial employees. 
20. **“Public employer”** means the State of Oregon, and the following political subdivisions: Cities, counties, community colleges, school districts, special districts, mass transit districts, metropolitan service districts, public service corporations or municipal corporations and public and quasi-public corporations. 
21. **“Public employer representative”** includes any individual or individuals specifically designated by the public employer to act in its interests in all matters dealing with employee representation, collective bargaining and related issues. 
22. **“Strike”** means a public employee’s refusal in concerted action with others to report for duty, or his or her willful absence from his or her position, or his or her stoppage of work, or his or her absence in whole or in part from the full, faithful or proper performance of his or her duties of employment, for the purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change in the conditions, compensation, rights, privileges or obligations of public employment; however, nothing shall limit or impair the right of any public employee to lawfully express or communicate a complaint or opinion on any matter related to the conditions of employment. 
23. **\(a\) “Supervisory employee”** means any individual having authority in the interest of the employer to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward or discipline other employees, or responsibly to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such action, if in connection therewith, the exercise of the authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature but requires the use of independent judgment. Failure to assert supervisory status in any Employment Relations Board proceeding or in negotiations for any collective bargaining agreement does not thereafter prevent assertion of supervisory status in any subsequent board proceeding or contract negotiation.  **\(b\)“Supervisory employee”** includes a faculty member of a public university listed in ORS [352.002 \(Public universities\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/352.002) or the Oregon Health and Science University who:  **\(A\)** Is employed as a president, vice president, provost, vice provost, dean, associate dean, assistant dean, head or equivalent position; or  **\(B\)** Is employed in an administrative position without a reasonable expectation of teaching, research or other scholarly accomplishments.  **\(c\) “Supervisory employee”** does not include:  **\(A\)** A nurse, charge nurse or nurse holding a similar position if that position has not traditionally been classified as supervisory;  **\(B\)** A firefighter prohibited from striking by ORS [243.736 \(Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.736) who assigns, transfers or directs the work of other employees but does not have the authority to hire, discharge or impose economic discipline on those employees; or  **\(C\)** A faculty member of a public university listed in ORS [352.002 \(Public universities\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/352.002) or the Oregon Health and Science University who is not a faculty member described in paragraph \(b\) of this subsection. 
24. **“Unfair labor practice**” means the commission of an act designated an unfair labor practice in ORS [243.672 \(Unfair labor practices\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.672). 
25. **“Voluntary arbitration”** means the procedure whereby parties involved in a labor dispute mutually agree to submit their differences to a third party for a final and binding decision. \[Formerly [243.711](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.711); 1975 c.728 §1; 1978 c.5 §1; 1987 c.792 §1; 1995 c.286 §1; 1999 c.59 §61; 2001 c.104 §75; 2007 c.141 §1a; 2007 c.144 §3; 2013 c.302 §1; 2014 c.15 §1; 2015 c.99 §1; 2015 c.767 §65; 2017 c.553 §1\]

## ORS 243.656 Policy statement

The Legislative Assembly finds and declares that:

1. The people of this state have a fundamental interest in the development of harmonious and cooperative relationships between government and its employees; 
2. Recognition by public employers of the right of public employees to organize and full acceptance of the principle and procedure of collective negotiation between public employers and public employee organizations can alleviate various forms of strife and unrest. Experience in the private and public sectors of our economy has proved that unresolved disputes in the public service are injurious to the public, the governmental agencies, and public employees; 
3. Experience in private and public employment has also proved that protection by law of the right of employees to organize and negotiate collectively safeguards employees and the public from injury, impairment and interruptions of necessary services, and removes certain recognized sources of strife and unrest, by encouraging practices fundamental to the peaceful adjustment of disputes arising out of differences as to wages, hours, terms and other working conditions, and by establishing greater equality of bargaining power between public employers and public employees; 
4. The state has a basic obligation to protect the public by attempting to assure the orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of government; and 
5. It is the purpose of ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) to obligate public employers, public employees and their representatives to enter into collective negotiations with willingness to resolve grievances and disputes relating to employment relations and to enter into written and signed contracts evidencing agreements resulting from such negotiations. It is also the purpose of ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) to promote the improvement of employer-employee relations within the various public employers by providing a uniform basis for recognizing the right of public employees to join organizations of their own choice, and to be represented by such organizations in their employment relations with public employers. \[1973 c.536 §2\]

## ORS 243.662 Rights of public employees to join labor organizations

Public employees have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of labor organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation and collective bargaining with their public employer on matters concerning employment relations. \[Formerly [243.730](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.730)\]

## ORS 243.666 Certified or recognized labor organization as exclusive employee group representative

* protection of employee nonassociation rights
* A labor organization certified by the Employment Relations Board or recognized by the public employer is the exclusive representative of the employees of a public employer for the purposes of collective bargaining with respect to employment relations. Nevertheless any agreements entered into involving union security including an all-union agreement or agency shop agreement must safeguard the rights of nonassociation of employees, based on bona fide religious tenets or teachings of a church or religious body of which such employee is a member. Such employee shall pay an amount of money equivalent to regular union dues and initiation fees and assessments, if any, to a nonreligious charity or to another charitable organization mutually agreed upon by the employee affected and the representative of the labor organization to which such employee would otherwise be required to pay dues. The employee shall furnish written proof to the employer of the employee that this has been done.
* Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection \(1\) of this section, an individual employee or group of employees at any time may present grievances to their employer and have such grievances adjusted, without the intervention of the labor organization, if:  \(a\) The adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of a collective bargaining contract or agreement then in effect; and  \(b\) The labor organization has been given opportunity to be present at the adjustment. 
* Nothing in this section prevents a public employer from recognizing a labor organization which represents at least a majority of employees as the exclusive representative of the employees of a public employer when the board has not designated the appropriate bargaining unit or when the board has not certified an exclusive representative in accordance with ORS [243.686 \(Representation elections\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.686). \[Formerly [243.735](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.735); 1983 c.740 §65\]

## ORS 243.668¹  Legislative findings

1. The Legislative Assembly finds that:  \(a\) It is the policy of this state that public funds may not be used to subsidize interference with an employee’s choice to join or to be represented by a labor union.  \(b\) Some public employers use public funds to aid or subsidize efforts to deter union organizing.  \(c\) Use of public funds to deter union organizing is contrary to the purposes for which the funds were appropriated and is wasteful of scarce public resources. 
2. The purpose of ORS [243.670 \(Prohibition of actions by public employer to assist, promote or deter union organizing\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.670) is to maintain the neutrality of public bodies in labor organizing by forbidding the use of public funds for unintended purposes and to conserve public resources by ensuring that public funds are used as intended. \[2013 c.663 §3\]

> Note: [243.668 \(Legislative findings\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.668) was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added to or made a part of ORS chapter 243 or any series therein by legislative action. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.670¹ Prohibition of actions by public employer to assist, promote or deter union organizing

* rules

\(1\)As used in this section:

\(a\)“Assist, promote or deter union organizing” means any attempt by a public employer to influence the decision of any or all of its employees or the employees of its subcontractors regarding:

\(A\)Whether to support or oppose a labor organization that represents or seeks to represent those employees; or

\(B\)Whether to become a member of any labor organization.

\(b\)“Public funds” means moneys drawn from the State Treasury or any special or trust fund of the state government, including any moneys appropriated by the state government and transferred to any public body, as defined in ORS [174.109 \(“Public body” defined\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/174.109), and any other moneys under the control of a public official by virtue of office.

\(c\)“Public property” means any real property or facility owned or leased by a public employer.

\(2\)A public employer may not:

\(a\)Use public funds to support actions to assist, promote or deter union organizing; or

\(b\)Discharge, demote, harass or otherwise take adverse action against any individual because the individual seeks to enforce this section or testifies, assists or participates in any manner in an investigation, hearing or other proceeding to enforce this section.

\(3\)If an employee requests the opinion of the employee’s employer or supervisor about union organizing, nothing in this section prohibits the employer or supervisor from responding to the request of the employee.

\(4\)This section does not apply to an activity performed, or to an expense incurred, in connection with:

\(a\)Addressing a grievance or negotiating or administering a collective bargaining agreement.

\(b\)Allowing a labor organization or its representatives access to the public employer’s facilities or property.

\(c\)Performing an activity required by federal or state law or by a collective bargaining agreement.

\(d\)Negotiating, entering into or carrying out an agreement with a labor organization.

\(e\)Paying wages to a represented employee while the employee is performing duties if the payment is permitted under a collective bargaining agreement.

\(5\)\(a\) This section shall be enforced by the Employment Relations Board, which shall adopt rules necessary to implement and administer compliance. A resident of this state may intervene as a plaintiff in any action brought under this section.

\(b\) Nothing in this section prohibits a public employer from spending public funds for the purpose of representing the public employer in a proceeding before the board or in a judicial review of that proceeding. \[2013 c.663 §4\]

Note: [243.670 \(Prohibition of actions by public employer to assist, promote or deter union organizing\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.670) was added to and made a part of [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) by legislative action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.672¹ Unfair labor practices

* complaints
* filing fees

\(1\)It is an unfair labor practice for a public employer or its designated representative to do any of the following:

\(a\)Interfere with, restrain or coerce employees in or because of the exercise of rights guaranteed in ORS [243.662 \(Rights of public employees to join labor organizations\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.662).

\(b\)Dominate, interfere with or assist in the formation, existence or administration of any employee organization.

\(c\)Discriminate in regard to hiring, tenure or any terms or condition of employment for the purpose of encouraging or discouraging membership in an employee organization. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the entering into of a fair-share agreement between a public employer and the exclusive bargaining representative of its employees. If a “fair-share” agreement has been agreed to by the public employer and exclusive representative, nothing prohibits the deduction of the payment-in-lieu-of-dues from the salaries or wages of the employees.

\(d\)Discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee because the employee has signed or filed an affidavit, petition or complaint or has given information or testimony under ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782).

\(e\)Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the exclusive representative.

\(f\)Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782).

\(g\)Violate the provisions of any written contract with respect to employment relations including an agreement to arbitrate or to accept the terms of an arbitration award, where previously the parties have agreed to accept arbitration awards as final and binding upon them.

\(h\)Refuse to reduce an agreement, reached as a result of collective bargaining, to writing and sign the resulting contract.

\(i\)Violate ORS [243.670 \(Prohibition of actions by public employer to assist, promote or deter union organizing\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.670) \(2\).

\(2\)Subject to the limitations set forth in this subsection, it is an unfair labor practice for a public employee or for a labor organization or its designated representative to do any of the following:

\(a\)Interfere with, restrain or coerce any employee in or because of the exercise of any right guaranteed under ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782).

\(b\)Refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the public employer if the labor organization is an exclusive representative.

\(c\)Refuse or fail to comply with any provision of ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782).

\(d\)Violate the provisions of any written contract with respect to employment relations, including an agreement to arbitrate or to accept the terms of an arbitration award, where previously the parties have agreed to accept arbitration awards as final and binding upon them.

\(e\)Refuse to reduce an agreement, reached as a result of collective bargaining, to writing and sign the resulting contract.

\(f\)For any labor organization to engage in unconventional strike activity not protected for private sector employees under the National Labor Relations Act on June 6, 1995. This provision applies to sitdown, slowdown, rolling, intermittent or on-and-off again strikes.

\(g\)For a labor organization or its agents to picket or cause, induce, or encourage to be picketed, or threaten to engage in such activity, at the residence or business premises of any individual who is a member of the governing body of a public employer, with respect to a dispute over a collective bargaining agreement or negotiations over employment relations, if an objective or effect of such picketing is to induce another person to cease doing business with the governing body member’s business or to cease handling, transporting or dealing in goods or services produced at the governing body’s business. For purposes of this paragraph, a member of the Legislative Assembly is a member of the governing body of a public employer when the collective bargaining negotiation or dispute is between the State of Oregon and a labor organization. The Governor and other statewide elected officials are not considered members of a governing body for purposes of this paragraph. Nothing in this paragraph may be interpreted or applied in a manner that violates the right of free speech and assembly as protected by the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of Oregon.

\(3\)An injured party may file a written complaint with the Employment Relations Board not later than 180 days following the occurrence of an unfair labor practice. For each unfair labor practice complaint filed, a fee of $300 is imposed. For each answer to an unfair labor practice complaint filed with the board, a fee of $300 is imposed. The board may allow any other person to intervene in the proceeding and to present testimony. A person allowed to intervene shall pay a fee of $300 to the board. The board may, in its discretion, order fee reimbursement to the prevailing party in any case in which the complaint or answer is found to have been frivolous or filed in bad faith. The board shall deposit fees received under this section to the credit of the Employment Relations Board Administrative Account. \[1973 c.536 §4; 1995 c.286 §2; 2007 c.296 §1; 2011 c.593 §2; 2013 c.663 §6\]

## ORS 243.676¹ Processing of unfair labor practice complaints

* civil penalties

\(1\)Whenever a written complaint is filed alleging that any person has engaged in or is engaging in any unfair labor practice listed in ORS [243.672 \(Unfair labor practices\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.672) \(1\) and \(2\) and [243.752 \(Arbitration decision final\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.752), the Employment Relations Board or its agent shall:

\(a\)Cause to be served upon such person a copy of the complaint;

\(b\)Investigate the complaint to determine if a hearing on the unfair labor practice charge is warranted. If the investigation reveals that no issue of fact or law exists, the board may dismiss the complaint; and

\(c\)Set the matter for hearing if the board finds in its investigation made pursuant to paragraph \(b\) of this subsection that an issue of fact or law exists. The hearing shall be before the board or an agent of the board not more than 20 days after a copy of the complaint has been served on the person.

\(2\)Where, as a result of the hearing required pursuant to subsection \(1\)\(c\) of this section, the board finds that any person named in the complaint has engaged in or is engaging in any unfair labor practice charged in the complaint, the board shall:

\(a\)State its findings of fact;

\(b\)Issue and cause to be served on such person an order that the person cease and desist from the unfair labor practice;

\(c\)Take such affirmative action, including but not limited to the reinstatement of employees with or without back pay, as necessary to effectuate the purposes of ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290);

\(d\)Designate the amount and award representation costs, if any, to the prevailing party; and

\(e\)Designate the amount and award attorney fees, if any, to the prevailing party on appeal, including proceedings for Supreme Court review, of a board order.

\(3\)Where the board finds that the person named in the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaging in an unfair labor practice, the board shall:

\(a\)Issue an order dismissing the complaint; and

\(b\)Designate the amount and award representation costs, if any, to the prevailing party.

\(4\)\(a\) The board may award a civil penalty to any person as a result of an unfair labor practice complaint hearing, in the aggregate amount of up to $1,000 per case, without regard to attorney fees, if:

\(A\)The complaint has been affirmed pursuant to subsection \(2\) of this section and the board finds that the person who has committed, or who is engaging, in an unfair labor practice has done so repetitively, knowing that the action taken was an unfair labor practice and took the action disregarding this knowledge, or that the action constituting the unfair labor practice was egregious; or

\(B\)The complaint has been dismissed pursuant to subsection \(3\) of this section, and that the complaint was frivolously filed, or filed with the intent to harass the other person, or both.

\(b\)Notwithstanding paragraph \(a\) of this subsection, if the board finds that a public employer named in the complaint violated ORS [243.670 \(Prohibition of actions by public employer to assist, promote or deter union organizing\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.670) \(2\), the board shall impose a civil penalty equal to triple the amount of funds the public employer expended to assist, promote or deter union organizing.

\(5\)As used in subsections \(1\) to \(4\) of this section, “person” includes but is not limited to individuals, labor organizations, associations and public employers. \[1973 c.536 §5; 1979 c.219 §1; 1983 c.504 §1; 1983 c.559 §1; 2013 c.663 §7\]

## ORS 243.682¹ Representation questions

* investigation and hearings on petitions
* certification without election
* rules
* elections

\(1\)If a question of representation exists, the Employment Relations Board shall:

\(a\)Upon application of a public employer, a public employee or a labor organization, designate the appropriate bargaining unit, and in making its determination shall consider such factors as community of interest, wages, hours and other working conditions of the employees involved, the history of collective bargaining, and the desires of the employees. The board may determine a unit to be the appropriate unit in a particular case even though some other unit might also be appropriate. Unless a labor organization and a public employer agree otherwise, the board may not designate as appropriate a bargaining unit that includes:

\(A\)A faculty member described in ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) \(23\)\(c\)\(C\) who supervises one or more other faculty members; and

\(B\)Any faculty member who is supervised by a faculty member described in subparagraph \(A\) of this paragraph.

\(b\)Investigate and conduct a hearing on a petition that has been filed by:

\(A\)A labor organization alleging that 30 percent of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit desire to be represented for collective bargaining by an exclusive representative;

\(B\)A labor organization alleging that 30 percent of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit assert that the designated exclusive representative is no longer the representative of the majority of the employees in the unit;

\(C\)A public employer alleging that one or more labor organizations has presented a claim to the public employer requesting recognition as the exclusive representative in an appropriate bargaining unit; or

\(D\)An employee or group of employees alleging that 30 percent of the employees assert that the designated exclusive representative is no longer the representative of the majority of employees in the unit.

\(2\)\(a\) Notwithstanding subsection \(1\) of this section, when an employee, group of employees or labor organization acting on behalf of the employees files a petition alleging that a majority of employees in a unit appropriate for the purpose of collective bargaining wish to be represented by a labor organization for that purpose, or when a labor organization files a petition alleging that the majority in a group of unrepresented employees seek to be added to an existing bargaining unit, the board shall investigate the petition. If the board finds that a majority of the employees in a unit appropriate for bargaining or a majority of employees in a group of unrepresented employees that is appropriate to add to an existing bargaining unit have signed authorizations designating the labor organization specified in the petition as the employees’ bargaining representative and that no other labor organization is currently certified or recognized as the exclusive representative of any of the employees in the unit or in the group of unrepresented employees seeking to be added to an existing bargaining unit, the board may not conduct an election but shall certify the labor organization as the exclusive representative unless a petition for a representation election is filed as provided in subsection \(3\) of this section.

\(b\)The board by rule shall develop guidelines and procedures for the designation by employees of a bargaining representative in the manner described in paragraph \(a\) of this subsection. The guidelines and procedures must include:

\(A\)Model collective bargaining authorization language that may be used for purposes of making the designations described in paragraph \(a\) of this subsection;

\(B\)Procedures to be used by the board to establish the authenticity of signed authorizations designating bargaining representatives;

\(C\)Procedures to be used by the board to notify affected employees of the filing of a petition requesting certification under subsection \(3\) of this section;

\(D\)Procedures for filing a petition to request a representation election, including a timeline of not more than 14 days after notice has been delivered to the affected employees of a petition filed under paragraph \(a\) of this subsection; and

\(E\)Procedures for expedited resolution of any dispute about the scope of the appropriate bargaining unit. The resolution of the dispute may occur after an election is conducted.

\(c\)Solicitation and rescission of a signed authorization designating bargaining representatives are subject to the provisions of ORS [243.672 \(Unfair labor practices\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.672).

\(3\)\(a\) Notwithstanding subsection \(2\) of this section, when a petition requesting certification has been filed under subsection \(2\) of this section, an employee or a group of employees in the unit designated by the petition, or one or more of the unrepresented employees seeking to be added to an existing bargaining unit, may file a petition with the board to request that a representation election be conducted.

\(b\)The petition requesting a representation election must be supported by at least 30 percent of the employees in the bargaining unit designated by the petition, or 30 percent of the unrepresented employees seeking to be added to an existing bargaining unit.

\(c\)The representation election shall be conducted on-site or by mail not later than 45 days after the date on which the petition was filed.

\(4\)Except as provided in ORS [243.692 \(Limitation on successive representation elections\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.692), if the board finds in a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection \(1\)\(b\) of this section that a question of representation exists, the board shall conduct an election by secret ballot, at a time and place convenient for the employees of the jurisdiction and also within a reasonable period of time after the filing has taken place, and certify the results of the election. \[1973 c.536 §7; 2007 c.833 §1; 2013 c.663 §8; 2017 c.496 §3; 2017 c.553 §2\]

## ORS 243.684¹ Requirements for petition for representation

A petition for representation filed under ORS [243.682 \(Representation questions\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.682) \(2\) must include a statement of a desire by the employees to be represented and must be signed and dated by the employees during the 180 days before the petition is filed with the Employment Relations Board. \[2013 c.663 §5; 2017 c.496 §4\]

> Note: [243.684 \(Requirements for petition for representation\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.684) was enacted into law by the Legislative Assembly but was not added to or made a part of ORS chapter 243 or any series therein by legislative action. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.686¹ Representation elections

* ballot form
* determining organization to be certified
* consent elections
* The Employment Relations Board shall place on the ballot only those labor organizations designated to be placed on the ballot by more than 10 percent of the employees in an appropriate bargaining unit.
* The ballot shall contain a provision for marking no representation. 
* The board shall determine who is eligible to vote in the election and require the employer to provide a complete list of all such eligible persons, their names, addresses and job classifications to each candidate organization on the ballot at least 20 days before the election is to occur. 
* The labor organization which receives the majority of the votes cast in an election shall be certified by the board as the exclusive representative. 
* In any election where there are more than two choices on the ballot and none of the choices receives a majority of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be conducted. The ballot in the runoff election shall contain the two choices on the original ballot that received the largest number of votes. 
* Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the waiving of hearings by stipulation for the purpose of a consent election, in conformity with the rules of the board. \[1973 c.536 §8; 1983 c.83 §27; 1997 c.11 §4; 2010 c.22 §1\]

## ORS 243.692¹  Limitation on successive representation elections

\(1\)No election shall be conducted under ORS [243.682 \(Representation questions\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.682) \(4\) in any appropriate bargaining unit within which during the preceding 12-month period an election was held, nor during the term of any lawful collective bargaining agreement between a public employer and an employee representative. However, a contract with a term of more than three years shall be a bar for only the first three years of its term.

\(2\)Notwithstanding subsection \(1\) of this section, the Employment Relations Board shall rule that a contract will not be given the effect of barring an election if it finds that:

\(a\)Unusual circumstances exist under which the contract is no longer a stabilizing force; and

\(b\)An election should be held to restore stability to the representation of employees in the unit.

\(3\)A petition for an election where a contract exists must be filed not more than 90 calendar days and not less than 60 calendar days before the end of the contract period. If the contract is for more than three years, a petition for election may be filed any time after three years from the effective date of the contract. \[1973 c.536 §9; 1999 c.572 §1; 2007 c.833 §2\]

## ORS 243.696¹  State agency representatives in bargaining

* Chief Justice as representative of judicial branch

\(1\)The Oregon Department of Administrative Services shall represent all state agencies which have bargaining units in collective bargaining negotiations with the certified or recognized exclusive representatives of all appropriate bargaining units of exempt, unclassified and classified employees, except those unclassified employees governed by the provisions of ORS [240.240 \(Application of chapter to unclassified or management service\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.240). The department may delegate such collective bargaining responsibility to operating agencies as may be appropriate.

\(2\)The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court shall represent the judicial department in collective bargaining negotiations with the certified or recognized exclusive representatives of all appropriate bargaining units of officers and employees of the courts of this state who are state officers or employees. The Chief Justice may delegate such collective bargaining responsibility to the state court administrator. \[1973 c.536 §10; 1979 c.468 §25; 1983 c.763 §64\]

## ORS 243.698¹  Expedited bargaining process

* notice
* implementation of proposed changes

\(1\)When the employer is obligated to bargain over employment relations during the term of a collective bargaining agreement and the exclusive representative demands to bargain, the bargaining may not, without the consent of both parties and provided the parties have negotiated in good faith, continue past 90 calendar days after the date the notification specified in subsection \(2\) of this section is received.

\(2\)The employer shall notify the exclusive representative in writing of anticipated changes that impose a duty to bargain.

\(3\)Within 14 calendar days after the employer’s notification of anticipated changes specified in subsection \(2\) of this section is sent, the exclusive representative may file a demand to bargain. If a demand to bargain is not filed within 14 days of the notice, the exclusive representative waives its right to bargain over the change or the impact of the change identified in the notice.

\(4\)The expedited bargaining process shall cease 90 calendar days after the written notice described in subsection \(2\) of this section is sent, and the employer may implement the proposed changes without further obligations to bargain. At any time during the 90-day period, the parties jointly may agree to mediation, but that mediation shall not continue past the 90-day period from the date the notification specified in subsection \(2\) of this section is sent. Neither party may seek binding arbitration during the 90-day period. \[1995 c.286 §13\]

Note: [243.698 \(Expedited bargaining process\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.698) was added to and made a part of [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) by legislative action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.702¹  Renegotiation of invalid provisions in agreements

1. In the event any words or sections of a collective bargaining agreement are declared to be invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, by ruling by the Employment Relations Board, by statute or constitutional amendment or by inability of the employer or the employees to perform to the terms of the agreement, then upon request by either party the invalid words or sections of the collective bargaining agreement shall be reopened for negotiation. 
2. Renegotiation of a collective bargaining agreement pursuant to this section is subject to ORS [243.698 \(Expedited bargaining process\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.698). \[1973 c.536 §11; 1995 c.286 §4\]

## ORS 243.706¹  Agreement may provide for grievance and other disputes to be resolved by binding arbitration or other resolution process

* powers of arbitrator

\(1\)A public employer may enter into a written agreement with the exclusive representative of an appropriate bargaining unit setting forth a grievance procedure culminating in binding arbitration or any other dispute resolution process agreed to by the parties. As a condition of enforceability, any arbitration award that orders the reinstatement of a public employee or otherwise relieves the public employee of responsibility for misconduct shall comply with public policy requirements as clearly defined in statutes or judicial decisions including but not limited to policies respecting sexual harassment or sexual misconduct, unjustified and egregious use of physical or deadly force and serious criminal misconduct, related to work. In addition, with respect to claims that a grievant should be reinstated or otherwise relieved of responsibility for misconduct based upon the public employer’s alleged previous differential treatment of employees for the same or similar conduct, the arbitration award must conform to the following principles:

\(a\)Some misconduct is so egregious that no employee can reasonably rely on past treatment for similar offenses as a justification or defense to discharge or other discipline.

\(b\)Public managers have a right to change disciplinary policies at any time, notwithstanding prior practices, if such managers give reasonable advance notice to affected employees and the change does not otherwise violate a collective bargaining agreement.

\(2\)In addition to subsection \(1\) of this section, a public employer may enter into a written agreement with the exclusive representative of its employees providing that a labor dispute over conditions and terms of a contract may be resolved through binding arbitration.

\(3\)In an arbitration proceeding under this section, the arbitrators, or a majority of the arbitrators, may:

\(a\)Issue subpoenas on their own motion or at the request of a party to the proceeding to:

\(A\)Compel the attendance of a witness properly served by either party; and

\(B\)Require from either party the production of books, papers and documents the arbitrators find are relevant to the proceeding;

\(b\)Administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses; and

\(c\)Adjourn a hearing from day to day, or for a longer time, and from place to place.

\(4\)The arbitrators shall promptly provide a copy of a subpoena issued under this section to each party to the arbitration proceeding.

\(5\)The arbitrators issuing a subpoena under this section may rule on objections to the issuance of the subpoena.

\(6\)If a person fails to comply with a subpoena issued under this section or if a witness refuses to testify on a matter on which the witness may be lawfully questioned, the party who requested the subpoena or seeks the testimony may apply to the arbitrators for an order authorizing the party to apply to the circuit court of any county to enforce the subpoena or compel the testimony. On the application of the attorney of record for the party or on the application of the arbitrators, or a majority of the arbitrators, the court may require the person or witness to show cause why the person or witness should not be punished for contempt of court to the same extent and purpose as if the proceedings were pending before the court.

\(7\)Witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than parties or officers or employees of the public employer, shall receive fees and mileage as prescribed by law for witnesses in ORS [44.415 \(Fees and mileage of witnesses\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/44.415) \(2\). \[1973 c.536 §12; 1995 c.286 §5; 1999 c.75 §1\]

## ORS 243.712¹  Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period

* impasse
* final offer
* fact-finding
* effect of subsequent arbitration decision

\(1\)If after a 150-calendar-day period of good faith negotiations over the terms of an agreement or 150 days after certification or recognition of an exclusive representative no agreement has been signed, either or both of the parties may notify the Employment Relations Board of the status of negotiations and the need for assignment of a mediator. Any period of time in which the public employer or labor organization has been found by the Employment Relations Board to have failed to bargain in good faith shall not be counted as part of the 150-day period. This provision cannot be invoked by the party found to have failed to bargain in good faith. The parties may agree to request a mediator before the end of the 150-day period. Upon receipt of such notification or request, the board shall appoint a mediator and shall notify the parties of the appointment. The 150-day period shall begin when the parties meet for the first bargaining session and each party has received the other party’s initial proposal or on an alternative date to which the parties agree in writing.

\(2\)The board, upon receipt of a notification or request under subsection \(1\) of this section, shall render assistance to resolve the labor dispute according to the following schedule:

\(a\)Mediation shall be provided by the State Conciliation Service as provided by ORS [662.405 \(Declaration of policy\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/662.405) to [662.455 \(Conciliator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/662.455). Any time after 15 days of mediation, either party may declare an impasse. The mediator may declare an impasse at any time during the mediation process. Notification of an impasse shall be filed in writing with the board, and copies of the notification shall be submitted to the parties on the same day the notification is filed with the board.

\(b\)Within seven days of the declaration of impasse, each party shall submit to the mediator in writing the final offer of the party, including a cost summary of the offer. Upon receipt of the final offers, the mediator shall make public the final offers, including any proposed contract language and each party’s cost summary dealing with those issues, on which the parties have failed to reach agreement. Each party’s proposed contract language shall be titled “Final Offer.”

\(c\)Within 30 days after the mediator makes public the parties’ final offers, the parties may jointly petition the Employment Relations Board to appoint a fact finder. If the parties jointly petition for fact-finding, a fact finder shall be appointed and the hearing conducted as provided in ORS [243.722 \(Fact-finding procedure\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.722).

\(d\)If an agreement has not been reached 30 days after the mediator makes public the final offers, or if the parties participated in fact-finding, 30 days after the receipt of the fact finder’s report, the public employer may implement all or part of its final offer, and the public employees have the right to strike. After a collective bargaining agreement has expired, and prior to agreement on a successor contract, the status quo with respect to employment relations shall be preserved until completion of impasse procedures except that no public employer shall be required to increase contributions for insurance premiums unless the expiring collective bargaining agreement provides otherwise. Merit step and longevity step pay increases shall be part of the status quo unless the expiring collective bargaining agreement expressly provides otherwise.

\(3\)Nothing in subsection \(1\) or \(2\) of this section shall be construed to prohibit the parties at any time from voluntarily agreeing to submit any or all of the issues in dispute to final and binding arbitration. The arbitration shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with ORS [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746). The arbitration shall supersede the dispute resolution procedures set forth in ORS [243.726 \(Public employee strikes\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.726) and [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746). \[1973 c.536 §13; 1987 c.84 §1; 1995 c.286 §6; 2017 c.119 §1\]

## ORS 243.716¹  Use of volunteers not contracting out for services

The use of volunteers to provide services shall not be considered contracting out for services. The use of reserve police personnel that does not require layoff shall not be considered contracting out for services. \[1995 c.286 §14\]

Note: [243.716 \(Use of volunteers not contracting out for services\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.716) was added to and made a part of [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) by legislative action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.722¹  Fact-finding procedure

* costs
* basis for findings and opinions
* effect of subsequent arbitration decision

\(1\)In carrying out the fact-finding procedures authorized in ORS [243.712 \(Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.712) \(2\)\(c\), the public employer and the exclusive representative may select their own fact finder.

\(2\)\(a\) Where the parties have not selected their own fact finder within five days after written acknowledgment by the Employment Relations Board that fact-finding has been jointly initiated, the board shall submit to the parties a list of seven qualified, disinterested, unbiased persons. A list of Oregon fact-finding interest arbitrations for which each person has issued an award shall be included. Each party shall alternately strike three names from the list. The order of striking shall be determined by lot. The remaining individual shall be designated the “fact finder.”

\(b\)When both parties desire a panel of three fact finders instead of one as provided in this subsection, the board shall submit to the parties a list of seven qualified, unbiased, disinterested persons. Each party shall alternately strike two names from the list. The order of striking shall be determined by lot. The remaining three persons shall be designated “fact finders.”

\(c\)When the parties have not designated the fact finder and notified the board of their choice within five days after receipt of the list, the board shall appoint the fact finder from the list. However, if one of the parties strikes the names as prescribed in this subsection and the other party fails to do so, the board shall appoint the fact finder only from the names remaining on the list.

\(d\)The concerns regarding the bias and qualifications of the person designated by lot or by appointment may be challenged by a petition filed directly with the board. A hearing shall be held by the board within 10 days of filing the petition and the board shall issue a final and binding decision regarding the person’s neutrality within 10 days of the hearing.

\(3\)The fact finder shall establish dates and places of hearings. Upon the request of either party or the fact finder, the board shall issue subpoenas. The fact finder may administer oaths and shall afford all parties full opportunity to examine and cross-examine all witnesses and to present any evidence pertinent to the dispute. Not more than 30 days from the date of conclusion of the hearings, the fact finder shall make written findings of fact and recommendations for resolution of the dispute and shall serve such findings and recommendations upon the parties and upon the board. Service may be personal or by registered or certified mail. Not more than five working days after the findings and recommendations have been sent, the parties shall notify the board and each other whether or not they accept the recommendations of the fact finder. If the parties do not accept them, the board, five days after receiving notice that one or both of the parties do not accept the findings, shall publicize the fact finder’s findings of facts and recommendations.

\(4\)The parties may voluntarily agree at any time during or after fact-finding to submit any or all of the issues in dispute to final and binding arbitration, and if such agreement is reached prior to the publication of the fact finder’s findings of facts and recommendations, the board shall not publicize such findings and recommendations.

\(5\)The cost of fact-finding shall be borne equally by the parties involved in the dispute.

\(6\)Fact finders shall base their findings and opinions on the matters prescribed in this subsection in accordance with the criteria set out in ORS [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746)\(4\)\(a\) to \(h\). \[1973 c.536 §14; 1995 c.286 §7\]

## ORS 243.726¹  Public employee strikes

\(1\)Participation in a strike shall be unlawful for any public employee who is not included in an appropriate bargaining unit for which an exclusive representative has been certified by the Employment Relations Board or recognized by the employer; or is included in an appropriate bargaining unit that provides for resolution of a labor dispute by petition to final and binding arbitration; or when the strike is not made lawful under ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290).

\(2\)It shall be lawful for a public employee who is not prohibited from striking under subsection \(1\) of this section and who is in the appropriate bargaining unit involved in a labor dispute to participate in a strike over mandatory subjects of bargaining provided:

\(a\)The requirements of ORS [243.712 \(Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.712) and [243.722 \(Fact-finding procedure\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.722) relating to the resolution of labor disputes have been complied with in good faith;

\(b\)Thirty days have elapsed since the board has made public the fact finder’s findings of fact and recommendations or the mediator has made public the parties’ final offers;

\(c\)The exclusive representative has given 10 days’ notice by certified mail of its intent to strike and stating the reasons for its intent to strike to the board and the public employer;

\(d\)The collective bargaining agreement has expired, or the labor dispute arises pursuant to a reopener provision in a collective bargaining agreement or renegotiation under ORS [243.702 \(Renegotiation of invalid provisions in agreements\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.702) \(1\) or renegotiation under ORS [243.698 \(Expedited bargaining process\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.698); and

\(e\)The union’s strike does not include unconventional strike activity not protected under the National Labor Relations Act on June 6, 1995, and does not constitute an unfair labor practice under ORS [243.672 \(Unfair labor practices\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.672) \(2\)\(f\).

\(3\)\(a\) Where the strike occurring or is about to occur creates a clear and present danger or threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the public employer concerned may petition the circuit court of the county in which the strike has taken place or is to take place for equitable relief including but not limited to appropriate injunctive relief.

\(b\)If the strike is a strike of state employees the petition shall be filed in the Circuit Court of Marion County.

\(c\)If, after hearing, the court finds that the strike creates a clear and present danger or threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, it shall grant appropriate relief. Such relief shall include an order that the labor dispute be submitted to final and binding arbitration within 10 days of the court’s order pursuant to procedures in ORS [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746).

\(4\)\(a\) A labor organization may not declare or authorize a strike of public employees that is or would be in violation of this section. When it is alleged in good faith by the public employer that a labor organization has declared or authorized a strike of public employees that is or would be in violation of this section, the employer may petition the board for a declaration that the strike is or would be unlawful. The board, after conducting an investigation and hearing, may make such declaration if it finds that such declaration or authorization of a strike is or would be unlawful.

\(b\)When a labor organization or individual disobeys an order of the appropriate circuit court issued pursuant to enforcing an order of the board involving this section and ORS [243.736 \(Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.736) or [243.738 \(Strikes by employees of mass transit districts, transportation districts and municipal bus systems\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.738), they shall be punished according to the provisions of ORS [33.015 \(Definitions for ORS 33.015 to 33.155\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/33.015) to [33.155 \(Applicability\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/33.155), except that the amount of the fine shall be at the discretion of the court.

\(5\)An unfair labor practice by a public employer shall not be a defense to a prohibited strike. The board upon the filing of an unfair labor charge alleging that a public employer has committed an unfair labor practice during or arising out of the collective bargaining procedures set forth in ORS [243.712 \(Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.712) and [243.722 \(Fact-finding procedure\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.722), shall take immediate action on such charge and if required, petition the court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief or a restraining order.

\(6\)As used in this section, “danger or threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public” does not include an economic or financial inconvenience to the public or to the public employer that is normally incident to a strike by public employees. \[1973 c.536 §16; 1979 c.257 §1; 1989 c.1089 §1; 1991 c.724 §28; 1995 c.286 §8; 2017 c.496 §5\]

## ORS 243.732¹  Refusal to cross picket line as prohibited strike

Public employees, other than those engaged in a nonprohibited strike, who refuse to cross a picket line shall be deemed to be engaged in a prohibited strike and shall be subject to the terms and conditions of ORS [243.726 \(Public employee strikes\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.726), pertaining to prohibited strikes. \[1973 c.536 §23\]

## ORS 243.736¹  Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel

\(1\)It is unlawful for any of the following public employees to strike or recognize a picket line of a labor organization while in the performance of official duties:

\(a\)Deputy district attorneys;

\(b\)Emergency communications worker;

\(c\)Employee of the Oregon Youth Authority who has custody, control or supervision of youth offenders;

\(d\)Firefighter;

\(e\)Guard at a correctional institution or mental hospital;

\(f\)Parole and probation officer who supervises adult offenders; and

\(g\)Police officer.

\(2\)As used in this section, “emergency communications worker” means an individual whose official focal duties are receiving information through the emergency communications system under ORS [403.105 \(Definitions for ORS 305.823 and 403.105 to 403.250\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/403.105) to [403.250 \(Primary public safety answering points\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/403.250), relaying the information to public or private safety agencies or dispatching emergency equipment or personnel in response to the information. \[1973 c.536 §17; 1985 c.232 §1; 1989 c.793 §20; 2003 c.216 §1; 2007 c.646 §1; 2009 c.376 §1; 2015 c.247 §33\]

## ORS 243.738¹  Strikes by employees of mass transit districts, transportation districts and municipal bus systems

1. It is unlawful for any employee of a mass transit district, transportation district or municipal bus system to strike or recognize a picket line of a labor organization while in the performance of official duties. 
2. As used in this section:  \(a\) “Mass transit district” means a mass transit district established under ORS [267.010 \(Definitions for ORS 267.010 to 267.390\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/267.010) to [267.390 \(Acceptance of funds from United States\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/267.390).  \(b\) “Transportation district” means a transportation district established under ORS [267.510 \(Definitions for ORS 267.510 to 267.650\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/267.510) to [267.650 \(Finance elections\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/267.650). \[2007 c.641 §2\]

> Note: [243.738 \(Strikes by employees of mass transit districts, transportation districts and municipal bus systems\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.738) was added to and made a part of [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782) by legislative action but was not added to any smaller series therein. See Preface to Oregon Revised Statutes for further explanation.

## ORS 243.742¹  Binding arbitration when strike prohibited

1. It is the public policy of the State of Oregon that where the right of employees to strike is by law prohibited, it is requisite to the high morale of such employees and the efficient operation of such departments to afford an alternate, expeditious, effective and binding procedure for the resolution of labor disputes and to that end the provisions of ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290), providing for compulsory arbitration, shall be liberally construed. 
2. When the procedures set forth in ORS [243.712 \(Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.712) and [243.722 \(Fact-finding procedure\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.722), relating to mediation of a labor dispute, have not culminated in a signed agreement between the parties who are prohibited from striking, the public employer and exclusive representative of its employees shall include with the final offer filed with the mediator a petition to the Employment Relations Board in writing that initiates binding arbitration for bargaining units with employees referred to in ORS [243.736 \(Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.736) or [243.738 \(Strikes by employees of mass transit districts, transportation districts and municipal bus systems\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.738). Arbitration shall be scheduled by mutual agreement not earlier than 30 days following the submission of the final offer packages to the mediator. Arbitration shall be scheduled in accordance with the procedures prescribed in ORS [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746). \[1973 c.536 §18; 1995 c.286 §9; 2017 c.496 §6\]

## ORS 243.746¹  Selection of arbitrator

* arbitration procedure
* last best offers
* bases for findings and opinions
* sharing arbitration costs
* In carrying out the arbitration procedures authorized in ORS [243.712 \(Mediation upon failure to agree after 150-day period\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.712), [243.726 \(Public employee strikes\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.726) \(3\)\(c\) and [243.742 \(Binding arbitration when strike prohibited\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.742), the public employer and the exclusive representative may select their own arbitrator.
* Where the parties have not selected their own arbitrator within five days after notification by the Employment Relations Board that arbitration is to be initiated, the board shall submit to the parties a list of seven qualified, disinterested, unbiased persons. A list of Oregon interest arbitrations and fact-findings for which each person has issued an award shall be included. Each party shall alternately strike three names from the list. The order of striking shall be determined by lot. The remaining individual shall be designated the “arbitrator”:  \(a\) When the parties have not designated the arbitrator and notified the board of their choice within five days after receipt of the list, the board shall appoint the arbitrator from the list. However, if one of the parties strikes the names as prescribed in this subsection and the other party fails to do so, the board shall appoint the arbitrator only from the names remaining on the list.  \(b\) The concerns regarding the bias and qualifications of the person designated by lot or by appointment may be challenged by a petition filed directly with the board. A hearing shall be held by the board within 10 days of filing of the petition and the board shall issue a final and binding decision regarding the person’s neutrality within 10 days of the hearing. 
* The arbitrator shall establish dates and places of hearings. Upon the request of either party or the arbitrator, the board shall issue subpoenas. Not less than 14 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, each party shall submit to the other party a written last best offer package on all unresolved mandatory subjects, and neither party may change the last best offer package unless pursuant to stipulation of the parties or as otherwise provided in this subsection. The date set for the hearing may thereafter be changed only for compelling reasons or by mutual consent of the parties. If either party provides notice of a change in its position within 24 hours of the 14-day deadline, the other party will be allowed an additional 24 hours to modify its position. The arbitrator may administer oaths and shall afford all parties full opportunity to examine and cross-examine all witnesses and to present any evidence pertinent to the dispute. 
* Where there is no agreement between the parties, or where there is an agreement but the parties have begun negotiations or discussions looking to a new agreement or amendment of the existing agreement, unresolved mandatory subjects submitted to the arbitrator in the parties’ last best offer packages shall be decided by the arbitrator. Arbitrators shall base their findings and opinions on these criteria giving first priority to paragraph \(a\) of this subsection and secondary priority to paragraphs \(b\) to \(h\) of this subsection as follows:  \(a\) The interest and welfare of the public.  \(b\) The reasonable financial ability of the unit of government to meet the costs of the proposed contract giving due consideration and weight to the other services, provided by, and other priorities of, the unit of government as determined by the governing body. A reasonable operating reserve against future contingencies, which does not include funds in contemplation of settlement of the labor dispute, shall not be considered as available toward a settlement.  \(c\) The ability of the unit of government to attract and retain qualified personnel at the wage and benefit levels provided.  \(d\) The overall compensation presently received by the employees, including direct wage compensation, vacations, holidays and other paid excused time, pensions, insurance, benefits, and all other direct or indirect monetary benefits received.  \(e\) Comparison of the overall compensation of other employees performing similar services with the same or other employees in comparable communities. As used in this paragraph, “comparable” is limited to communities of the same or nearest population range within Oregon. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, the following additional definitions of “comparable” apply in the situations described as follows:  **\(A\)** For any city with a population of more than 325,000, “comparable” includes comparison to out-of-state cities of the same or similar size;  **\(B\)** For counties with a population of more than 400,000, “comparable” includes comparison to out-of-state counties of the same or similar size;  **\(C\)** Except as otherwise provided in subparagraphs \(D\) and \(E\) of this paragraph, for the State of Oregon, “comparable” includes comparison to other states;  **\(D\)** For the Department of State Police troopers, “comparable” includes the base pay for city police officers employed by the five most populous cities in this state; and  **\(E\)** For Department of State Police telecommunicators, as defined in ORS [181A.355 \(Definitions for ORS 181A.355 to 181A.670\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/181A.355), “comparable” includes the base pay for telecommunicators employed by the five public safety answering points in this state, as defined in ORS [403.105 \(Definitions for ORS 305.823 and 403.105 to 403.250\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/403.105), with the most employees.  \(f\) The CPI-All Cities Index, commonly known as the cost of living.  \(g\) The stipulations of the parties.  \(h\) Such other factors, consistent with paragraphs \(a\) to \(g\) of this subsection as are traditionally taken into consideration in the determination of wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. However, the arbitrator shall not use such other factors, if in the judgment of the arbitrator, the factors in paragraphs \(a\) to \(g\) of this subsection provide sufficient evidence for an award. 
* Not more than 30 days after the conclusion of the hearings or such further additional periods to which the parties may agree, the arbitrator shall select only one of the last best offer packages submitted by the parties and shall promulgate written findings along with an opinion and order. The opinion and order shall be served on the parties and the board. Service may be personal or by registered or certified mail. The findings, opinions and order shall be based on the criteria prescribed in subsection \(4\) of this section. 
* The cost of arbitration shall be borne equally by the parties involved in the dispute. \[1973 c.536 §19; 1995 c.286 §10; 2001 c.104 §76; 2009 c.878 §1; 2015 c.769 §1; 2017 c.119 §2\]

## ORS 243.752¹  Arbitration decision final

* enforcement
* effective date of compensation increases
* modifying award
* A majority decision of the arbitration panel, under ORS [243.706 \(Agreement may provide for grievance and other disputes to be resolved by binding arbitration or other resolution process\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.706), [243.726 \(Public employee strikes\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.726), [243.736 \(Strikes by deputy district attorneys and certain emergency and public safety personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.736), [243.738 \(Strikes by employees of mass transit districts, transportation districts and municipal bus systems\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.738), [243.742 \(Binding arbitration when strike prohibited\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.742) and [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746), if supported by competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record, based upon the factors set forth in ORS [243.746 \(Selection of arbitrator\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.746) \(4\), shall be final and binding upon the parties. Refusal or failure to comply with any provision of a final and binding arbitration award is an unfair labor practice. Any order issued by the Employment Relations Board pursuant to this section may be enforced at the instance of either party or the board in the circuit court for the county in which the dispute arose.
* The arbitration panel may award increases retroactively to the first day after the expiration of the immediately preceding collective bargaining agreement. At any time the parties, by stipulation, may amend or modify an award of arbitration. \[1973 c.536 §20; 1981 c.423 §1; 1983 c.504 §2; 2017 c.496 §7\]

## ORS 243.756¹  Employment conditions during arbitration

During the pendency of arbitration proceedings that occur after the expiration of a previous collective bargaining agreement, all wages and benefits shall remain frozen at the level last in effect before the agreement expired, except that no public employer shall be required to increase contributions for insurance premiums unless the expiring collective bargaining agreement provides otherwise. Merit step and longevity step pay increases shall be part of the status quo unless the expiring collective bargaining agreement expressly provides otherwise. \[1973 c.536 §21; 1995 c.286 §11\]

## ORS 243.762¹  Alternative arbitration procedure under collective bargaining agreement

Nothing in ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290) is intended to prohibit a public employer and the exclusive representative of its employees from entering into a collective bargaining agreement which provides for a compulsory arbitration procedure which is substantially equivalent to ORS [243.742 \(Binding arbitration when strike prohibited\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.742) to [243.756 \(Employment conditions during arbitration\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.756). \[1973 c.536 §22\]

## ORS 243.766¹  Board duties in administration of collective bargaining laws

* rules

The Employment Relations Board shall:

1. Establish procedures for, investigate and resolve any disputes concerning the designation of an appropriate bargaining unit. 
2. Establish procedures for, resolve disputes with respect to, and supervise the conduct of elections for the determination of employee representation. 
3. Conduct proceedings on complaints of unfair labor practices by employers, employees and labor organizations and take such actions with respect thereto as it deems necessary and proper. 
4. Petition the appropriate circuit court for enforcement of any order issued by the board pursuant to ORS [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782). 
5. Hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems necessary to carry out properly its functions and powers, and for the purpose of such hearings and inquiries, administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and documents and issue subpoenas. 
6. Conduct studies on problems relating to public employment relations and make recommendations with respect thereto to the legislative bodies; request information and data from state and county departments and agencies and labor organizations necessary to carry out its functions and responsibilities; make available to public employers, labor organizations, mediators, members of fact-finding boards, arbitrators and other concerned parties statistical data relating to wages, benefits, and employment practices in public and private employment to assist them in resolving issues in negotiation. 
7. Adopt rules relative to the exercise of its powers and authority and to govern the proceedings before it in accordance with ORS chapter 183. \[1973 c.536 §24\]

## ORS 243.772¹  Effect of collective bargaining laws on local charters and ordinances

Any provisions of local charters and ordinances adopted pursuant thereto in existence on October 5, 1973, and not in conflict with the rights and duties established in ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290) may remain in full force and effect after the Employment Relations Board has determined that no conflict exists. \[1973 c.536 §15\]

## ORS 243.776¹  Rights and responsibilities of public employees

The rights and responsibilities prescribed for state officers and employees in ORS [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) shall accrue to employees of all public employers. \[1973 c.536 §32\]

## ORS 243.778¹  Student representation when bargaining unit includes public university faculty

1. When an appropriate bargaining unit includes members of the faculty of a public university listed in ORS [352.002 \(Public universities\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/352.002), the duly organized and recognized entity of student government at that university may designate three representatives to meet and confer with the public employer of those members of the faculty and the exclusive representative of that appropriate bargaining unit prior to collective bargaining. 
2. During the course of collective bargaining between the public employer and the exclusive representative described in subsection \(1\) of this section, the representatives of student government designated under subsection \(1\) of this section shall:  \(a\) Be allowed to attend and observe all meetings between the public employer and the exclusive representative at which collective bargaining occurs;  \(b\) Have access to all written documents pertaining to the collective bargaining negotiations exchanged by the public employer and the exclusive representative, including copies of any prepared written transcripts of the bargaining session;  \(c\) Be allowed to comment in good faith during the bargaining sessions upon matters under consideration; and  \(d\) Be allowed to meet and confer with the exclusive representative and the public employer regarding the terms of an agreement between them prior to the execution of a written contract incorporating that agreement. 
3. Rules regarding confidentiality and release of information shall apply to student representatives in the same manner as employer and employee bargaining unit representatives. 
4. As used in this section, “meet and confer” means the performance of the mutual obligation of the representatives of student government designated under subsection \(1\) of this section, the exclusive representative and the public employer, or any two of them, to meet at the request of one of them at reasonable times at a place convenient to all to conduct in good faith an interchange of views concerning the duties of each under this section, employment relations of the faculty, the negotiation of an agreement and the execution of a written agreement. \[1975 c.679 §2; 2011 c.637 §78\]

## ORS 243.782¹  Representation by counsel authorized

1. For purposes of proceedings commenced pursuant to ORS [240.060 \(Employment Relations Board\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.060), [240.065 \(Appointment\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.065), [240.080 \(Chairperson appointed by Governor\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.080), [240.123 \(Board personnel\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/240.123), [243.650 \(Definitions for ORS 243.650 to 243.782\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.650) to [243.782 \(Representation by counsel authorized\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/243.782), [292.055 \(Deduction for payment to labor organization\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/292.055) and [341.290 \(General powers\)](https://www.oregonlaws.org/ors/341.290), a person may be represented by counsel or any other agent authorized by such person. 
2. As used in subsection \(1\) of this section, “person” means any individual, a labor organization or a public employer. \[1973 c.536 §33\]

