---
description: Attachment to DOC Policy Number 10.1.4
---

# 10.1.4 - Attachment

## Strategic Energy Management Policy

#### Oregon Department of Corrections

### Background:

Oregon Department of Corrections \(DOC\) is committed to Energy Trust of Oregon’s Strategic Energy Management \(SEM\) program for state correctional facilities and buildings.

The SEM Policy is guided by the Governor’s Executive Order 06-02, the Governor’s 10-year Energy Plan, OAR 330-130-0010, Statewide Policy 107-011-010 and DOC’s Current Sustainability Plan. It is essential for DOC to continually explore options to reduce operating costs by conserving energy and reducing utility costs. This SEM policy provides the foundation for creating a roadmap to achieve these goals, as well as prevention of greenhouse gases and improving overall energy efficiencies while maintaining safe and secure correctional facilities.

### Mission Statement:

The Oregon DOC is committed to the sustainability and stewardship of our natural resources and environment. By maximizing efforts to develop and implement sustainable practices the impact on the environment will be minimized and overall operating costs will be reduced. Aggressive energy management is critical to our overall sustainability efforts. DOC is committed to sustainable operations to protect our environment, save taxpayer money, and model positive practices to adults in custody.

### Guiding Principles:

* A strategic approach to energy management, integrating energy management considerations into everyday decision-making and practices.
* Establish specific energy reduction goals or targets and employ a deliberate process to identify and assess opportunities for improvement and apply best practices, including procurement and use of emerging technology and equipment.
* Employee awareness, involvement, and accountability are central to the success of this energy management initiative.
* Energy management investments will yield a solid return on investment. The agency will apply consistent methods of financial analysis that consider total cost of ownership and operation.
* Leverage available national and local resources to assist in achieving energy management goals; including use of business, technical and financial assistance resources.
* Monitor, track and report on progress based on specific performance indicators; communicate results; apply lessons learned; review plans annually; and update as appropriate.

### DOC Goals:

The Governor’s 10-year energy plan, released in 2012, requires state owned buildings to reduce energy consumption by 20% over the next ten years and reduction of greenhouse gases by 10% by 2020. Specific facility or department goals and performance standards, as well as distinct goals for electricity and natural gas reduction, will be established as part of ongoing evaluation and assessment process.

### Energy Use Performance Metrics:

All energy consumption \(kBtu \(kWh,therms, propane, diesel and geothermal\)/square foot\) and greenhouse gas emissions will be tracked using the following metrics:

* Energy consumption and utility costs will be tracked in Energy Star Portfolio Manager.
* 2013 has been established as the baseline year for our agency.
* Each facility has a Site Energy Use Intensity \(EUI\) established.
* In addition, energy consumption will be tracked using Strategic Energy Group \(SEG\) Excel spreadsheet for natural gas and electricity and will be normalized for weather and occupancy.
* Total greenhouse gas emissions will be tracked using the Energy Star Portfolio Manager.

Energy and cost savings will be determined by comparing current energy consumption with past baseline energy consumption \(2013\) for buildings and facilities. Energy saving impacts from specific energy management projects and activities will be tracked as appropriate.

Enacted on 1st day of November, 2016

**Executive Sponsor:** Chad Naugle, Sustainability Coordinator

**Executive Approval:** Brian Belleque, Deputy Director

