# 20.1.6 - Uniform Checklist and Standards

## Correctional Security Employees

### I. Issuance of uniforms:

A. Correctional security employees will be furnished a standard uniform issue which will include:

* [ ] One pair of charcoal gray trousers 
* [ ] One gray long sleeved uniform Class A shirt with department shoulder patch and institution rocker
* [ ] Four gray short sleeved uniform Class A shirts with department shoulder patch and institution rocker, or four gray long/short sleeved polo shirts with embroidered department seven point star badge and facility on left chest, or a combination of both not to exceed four shirts
* [ ] Four black BDU trousers/pants
* [ ] Three black BDU tops \(for Special Housing only\)
* [ ] One all purpose black raincoat with liner, department shoulder patch, institution rocker and cloth name tag
* [ ] One black clip-on tie
* [ ] One black belt
* [ ] One black baseball-type cap with an embroidered department seven-point star badge with the institution specific rocker above the star
* [ ] One department metal badge:  \* Silver – Officers, Corporals, Sergeants  \* Gold – Lieutenants, Captains
* [ ] Pair metal rank insignia  \* Silver – Corporals, Sergeants  \* Gold – Lieutenants, Captains
* [ ] One black name tag with rank and five-year service star
* [ ] One tilley hat

  > \(only for employees assigned to yard and work crews or other assignments where the employee is exposed to extreme weather\)

* [ ] One two-piece rain suit

  > \(only for employees requiring such equipment\)

B. The functional unit manager or designee may request additional uniform attire for weather or safety conditions or for outside work-crews with written approval from the Assistant Director of Operations or designee.

C. Optional attire _**\(employee purchased\):**_

* [ ] Department standard black vests may be purchased on a price agreement through the uniform vendor. The employee may have the appropriate colored badge and name embroidered on the vest. No substitutions will be authorized. 
* [ ] Department standard black sweaters may be purchased on a price agreement through the uniform vendor. No substitutions will be authorized. The badge and nametag may be worn on the sweater.
* [ ] Duty belt, 2” wide black nylon or leather belt may be worn with the uniform while on duty.
* [ ] Plain black gloves and/or other cold weather accessories, as authorized by the functional unit manager or designee.
* [ ] Plain white or black t-shirt \(i.e., no lettering or design\) may be worn under the uniform shirt. T-shirt sleeves shall not extend below the sleeves of the uniform shirt.
* [ ] Commemorative badge \(2006\) may be worn for the life of the employee’s career.

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. Uniform Cap:

1. May be worn at the discretion of the individual except at certain times as determined by the functional unit manager \(e.g., parades or special functions attended by staff in uniform\); 
2. Will be placed squarely on the head with the bill to the front.

B. Uniform Shirts:

1. A long sleeved Class A uniform shirt will always be worn with the metal badge and may be worn with the black tie. If no tie is worn, all buttons will be buttoned, except the top shirt button. The sleeves must be rolled down and buttoned. The Class A uniform shirt and tie shall be worn at ceremonial occasions \(e.g., formal functions, parades, promotional interviews\). 
2. Short-sleeved shirts may be worn during the entire year. Underclothing may not be exposed beyond the sleeves. 
3. Long sleeved polo shirts must be rolled down at all times. 
4. All uniform shirts will be tucked in at all times.

C. Footwear:

1. Will be of black leather, round-toed, low heels with black soles. The base of the heal must be at least 1” square. The upper portion of boots may be black cordura nylon or black leather. 
2. Must be shined and in good repair. 
3. Socks that are visible must be black in color unless a documented medical condition exists regarding white socks.

D. Badges and Insignias:

1. Metal rank insignia will be worn on the collars of the Class A uniform shirt. 
2. No rank insignia will be worn on polo shirts. The name tag with rank will be worn on the right front side of the polo shirt. 
3. Metal badge will be worn on the left front side of the Class A uniform shirt. 
4. Cloth badge will be worn on the left front side of the coat. 
5. Cloth name tags will be worn on the right side of the coat.

### III. Additional Standards for Dress and Grooming for SCCI SUMMIT Correctional Security Employees

A. Because of the programming requirements of the SCCI SUMMIT program, SCCI SUMMIT staff will follow the same standards for dress and grooming as above, with these additional requirements:

1. Footwear: Employees assigned as community officers will wear athletic shoes and socks for physical training and related activities. 
2. Physical Training Uniform: The physical training \(PT\) uniform will consist of black sweat bottoms and tops which display the SUMMIT logo, a department-issued baseball cap, athletic shoes, and a department provided black running vest designed to hold radio, handcuffs, and keys.

## Investigations Unit

### I. Issuance of Uniforms:

A. Inspector 2 Drug Detection K-9 Handlers will be furnished a standard uniform issue, which will include:

* [ ] One black jumpsuit with DOC patches, unit rocker, cloth nametag and silver cloth badge sewn on, and
* [ ] Five pair black BDU trousers, and
* [ ] Five long/short sleeved BDU shirts with:  DOC patches, unit rocker, cloth name tag and silver cloth badge sewn on
* [ ] One all-weather jacket
* [ ] One baseball cap
* [ ] One black name tag with department emblem and service star
* [ ] One duty belt, black nylon, equipped with:  1. Leathermans tool 2. Mini-mag light  3. Handcuffs  4. Ball pouch  5. First aid pouch  6. Additional safety/security equipment as deemed necessary  7. One metal silver badge  8. One badge case

B. Inspector 1, Inspector 2 \(non-Drug Detection K-9 Handlers\), Inspector 3, Investigations Manager, and the Investigations Administrator will be issued the following items for wear at appropriate times:

* [ ] Two pair black BDU trousers/pants
* [ ] Two gray long/short sleeved polo shirt with: embroidered department seven point star badge and unit on left chest
* [ ] One DOC black name tag with department emblem and service star
* [ ] One all-weather jacket
* [ ] One black nylon duty belt equipped with: 1. Mini-mag light 2. Handcuffs 3. First aid pouch
* [ ] One baseball cap
* [ ] One metal gold or silver badge \(as appropriate\)
* [ ] One badge case

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. Uniform cap may be worn at the discretion of the individual except at times determined by the functional unit manager.

B. Drug Detection K-9 Handlers may wear an Oregon Police Canine Association \(OPCA\) patch on the uniform right chest pocket if the K-9 team \(handler and dog\) is currently accredited by OPCA.

C. The same requirements which apply to correctional security employee uniforms regarding footwear will apply to this uniform.

## Physical Plant

### I. Issuance of Uniforms:

A. Physical Plant employees will be furnished a standard uniform issue, which will include:

* [ ] Five pair of black cotton trousers
* [ ] Five 100% cotton long/short sleeved polo shirts with embroidered DOC shield and facility on left chest
* [ ] One black raincoat with liner and department shoulder patch with institution rocker
* [ ] One black belt
* [ ] One black baseball-type cap with a DOC emblem and appropriate departmental rocker

B. Physical Plant manager and office employees will not be required to wear a uniform.

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. The same requirements which apply to correctional security employee uniforms regarding footwear will apply to this uniform. Steel-toed work boots may be required dependent on the employee’s job duties. The functional unit manager will provide clarification.

B. The functional unit manager or designee may request additional clothing items for weather and safety conditions. All requests for these items will need approval by the Assistant Director of Operations or his/her designee.

## Distribution Services

### I. Issuance of Uniforms:

A. Distribution Services staff will be furnished a standard uniform issue which will include:

* [ ] Four gray long/short sleeved polo shirts with embroidered ODOC shield and unit over left chest and one gray short/long sleeved uniform Class A shirt with ODOC shield and unit rocker, or any combination thereof not to exceed five shirts.
* [ ] Five black BDU trousers /pants
* [ ] One black belt
* [ ] One black raincoat with liner

B. Distribution Services managers will not be required to wear a uniform;

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. Steel-toed work boots may be required dependent on the employee’s job duties. The functional unit manager will provide clarification.

## Food Services

### I. Issuance of Uniforms:

A. Food Services employees will be furnished a standard uniform issue which will include:

* [ ] Five pair black BDU trousers/pants
* [ ] Five white uniform short/long sleeved shirts with department shoulder patches with institution rocker
* [ ] One black raincoat with liner and department shoulder patches with institution rocker
* [ ] One black belt
* [ ] One black baseball type cap with a DOC shield and institution rocker

B. The Food Services manager and office employees will not be required to wear a uniform.

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. The same requirements which apply to correctional security employee uniforms regarding footwear will apply to this uniform;

B. Institution issued caps or appropriate hair nets will be worn at all times while on duty.

## Recreation/Activities

### I. Issuance of Uniforms:

A. Recreation/Activities employees will be furnished a standard uniform issue, which will include:

* [ ] Five pair of black BDU trousers/pants
* [ ] Five gray polo short/long sleeved shirts with embroidered DOC shield and institution on left chest
* [ ] One black raincoat with liner and shoulder patch and institution rocker
* [ ] One black belt
* [ ] One black baseball type cap with a DOC shield and institution

B. The Recreation/Activities manager will not be required to wear a uniform.

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. The same requirements which apply to correctional security employee uniforms regarding footwear will apply to this uniform.

## Health Services

\(Updated 9/1/07\)

### I. Issuance of Uniforms

A. Health Services employees will be furnished a standard uniform issue, which will include:

* [ ] Three white lab jackets
* [ ] Three sets of department shoulder patches with institution rockers
* [ ] Department shoulder patch and a Health Services rocker will be worn on both sleeves of all jackets 

B. Health Services managers may designate that certain employees wear scrubs in addition to the uniform lab coat:

* [ ] Scrubs

### II. Proper Wearing of the Uniform:

A. Lab Jackets:

1. Staff will wear state-issued lab jackets at all times when providing direct patient care \(care and/or treatment that requires some type of physical assessment\) or when working in the immediate vicinity of other ODOC staff and/or inmates. 
2. Dental staff may choose to remove lab jackets while working in the dental clinic. If removed, the jacket must be kept in a secured area. 
3. CTS staff are not required to wear lab jackets with the exception of SMU nurses. SMU nurses shall wear lab jackets when providing direct patient care and when outside the SMU area. 
4. Management and administrative staff are required to wear lab jackets when providing direct patient care. Otherwise, lab jackets shall be kept in a secure location.

B. Footwear: Closed toed shoes will be worn at all times. Moccasins, sandals, thongs and slippers are not permitted.

C. Fingernails may extend only 1/4 inch beyond the fingertips.

D. Hair that is shoulder length or longer must be pulled back and secured at all times when providing direct patient care.

