---
description: 20.1.1
---

# 20.1.1 - Dept. Mission Vision, & Core Values

| **Title:** | Department Mission Vision, & Core Values |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Effective:** | 09/01/1998 |
| **Supersedes:** | 07/15/1998 |
| **Applicability:** | All employees, volunteers, and contract service providers |
| **Directives Cross-Reference:** | _**None**_ |

## I. PURPOSE {#i-purpose}

To provide all employees, volunteers, and contractors with a clear department mission statement, a vision for the desired future, and a core value-set that will provide the day-to-day governance and desired organizational culture for the department.

## II. POLICY {#ii-policy}

The following department mission, vision, and core values are adopted to enable a framework for employee decision-making and personal behavior in the daily conduct of business. All department employees are expected to support and be guided by them.

## **Mission**

The mission of the Oregon Department of Corrections is to promote public safety by holding offenders accountable for their actions and reducing the risk of future criminal behavior.

## **Vision**

We take a proactive role in the development of criminal justice policy.

We create partnerships with Oregon communities to hold offenders accountable, engage victims, and enhance the quality of life for the citizens of Oregon.

We are a committed, creative, and productive organization which recognizes safety and security as an essential business practice.

We require sound fiscal management of public resources using outcome-oriented strategies.

We provide offender programs and resources which support the department's mission.

We are a diverse, skilled work force which shares the responsibility for outcomes across organizational boundaries.

## **Core Values**

_**We Value:**_

* Our responsibilities
* Integrity
* Teamwork
* Respecting others
* Constructive change
* The participation of all

## III. IMPLEMENTATION {#iii-implementation}

This policy will be adopted immediately without further modification

