---
description: 20.5.17
---

# 20.5.17 - Management of Injured Workers

## I. PURPOSE

The purpose of this policy is to establish a Department of Corrections program to return an employee with a compensable work-related injury or illness to an available and suitable position as soon as possible. This program will include provisions for an EarlyReturn-To-Work \(ERTW\) program \(temporary transitional work/modified duty work\) when appropriate and available while the employee is recovering from the on-the-job injury or illness. ERTW guidelines may be applied to employees who sustain an off-thejob injury if temporary modified work is available and appropriate \(See Section IV, Policy Clarification, A.\).

## II. DEFINITIONS

A. Available reinstatement means the injured employee's job at the time of injury/illness, if the position exists, and the employee is released by the treating physician back to his/her regular position regardless of the hiring or assignment of a replacement worker to that position. If the former position no longer exists, the employee will be reinstated in another existing position that is vacant and suitable. Rights of reinstatement will be subject to the provisions for seniority rights and other employment restrictions contained in valid collective bargaining agreements.

B. Available Reemployment refers to another existing position that is vacant and suitable if the employee is disabled from performing the duties of his/her former regular position. Rights of reemployment will be subject to the provisions for seniority rights and other employment restrictions contained in valid collective bargaining agreements.

C. Early-Return-to-Work \(ERTW\) is a program and process of returning an on-thejob injured employee to a transitional work assignment or temporary modified duty as soon as possible after the treating physician provides a modified duty or restricted duty work release, provided that temporary modified work is available, suitable, and/or appropriate. \(See Section IV, Policy Clarification, B.\).

D. Suitable reinstatement employment is the position held at time of injury if the employee is not disabled from performing the duties of that position or if that position no longer exists, an existing and vacant position that is most similar to the former position in compensation, duties, responsibilities, skills, location, duration, and shift. Please see Available reinstatement above.

E. Suitable reemployment is an existing and vacant position that meets the injured employees’ medical restrictions and for which the employee is qualified to perform the essential functions of the position, with or without accommodation. A suitable position is as similar as practical to the former position in compensation, duties, responsibilities, skills, location, duration, and shift and is within the same or lower salary range as the position held at time of injury. A suitable reemployment position is paid at the rate provided for in the compensation plan for that position. Please see Available reemployment above.

F. Transitional work assignments or temporary modified work is designed to give an employee meaningful work while continuing to heal from an injury or illness. These are not permanent assignments or duties, but transitional work or modified duty assignments designed to meet temporary restrictions placed on the injured employee by the treating physician.

## III. POLICY

It is an unlawful employment practice to discriminate against an employee \(permanent or temporary\) or potential employee with respect to hire, tenure, or any term or condition of employment because the individual has applied for Workers Compensation benefits, invoked, or utilized the procedures provided for in ORS Chapter 656 or has given testimony under the provisions of those laws.

### A. Early Return to Work \(ERTW\):

1. The Department of Corrections shall endeavor to return an on-the-job injured employee to temporary transitional work or modified duty within three working days of an injury, illness, or attending physician’s release. 
2. The assigned safety manager, in consultation with the on-the-job injured employee’s supervisor, will follow the procedures as outlined in Attachment A, “SAIF Claims Management”. 
3. Temporary transitional or modified duty is typically limited to 30 days. With continued improvement, 30-day extensions are possible but generally ERTW is limited to total of 90 days. During these 30-day extension periods employees shall provide an updated Employee Medical Status Report \(within Attachment A\) or a treating physician generated medical status statement. Extensions over 90 days may be granted due to major changes in claim status that have occurred during the present temporary modified duty such as surgery, but the Departments Administrator of Safety & Risk must approve all extensions. Extensions of transitional work or modified duty are limited to 30-day increments or less and will not exceed a total of an additional 90 days due to a major  change in claim status. An employee who is not released to return to full unrestricted duty \(full release from the attending physician\) after completing 90 days of a temporary modified duty assignment \(barring possible extensions\) will be placed on leave.An employee who has filed a claim for workers’ compensation benefits and is in temporary transitional work or temporarily modified duty will receive the same salary or rate of pay at time of injury, including any differentials during the transitional work period, regardless of shift, location, etc, of the transitional work. 

### B. Workers’ Compensation - Reinstatement/Reemployment

1. Reinstatement of the employee to the position at time of injury will be in accordance with the ORS 659A.043, “Reinstatement of injured worker to former position; certificate of physician evidencing ability to work; effect of collective bargaining agreement; termination of right to reinstatement; when reinstatement right terminates”.  
2. Reemployment of an injured worker who is disabled from returning to his/her former position will be done in accordance with ORS 659A.046, “Reemployment of injured worker in other available and suitable work; termination of right to reemployment; certificate of physician; effect of collective bargaining agreement”. The Departments Administrator of Safety & Risk shall determine suitable and available reemployment options. 

### C. Statewide Injured Workers List \(entry level positions\)

1. An employee with a compensable claim who cannot be reinstated or reemployed within the Department of Corrections shall be placed on the Statewide Injured Workers List by the Department’s Human Resources Recruitment Division unless the employee is ineligible for placement on such list \(see \# 3 below\).  a. The injured employee shall provide a current detailed PD-100 to the Department’s Administrator of Safety & Risk when it has been determined that the injured employee cannot be reinstated or reemployed within the Department of Corrections.  b. The Department of Corrections, Human Resources Recruitment Division shall determine the appropriate classifications based on the supplied PD-100 from the injured employee for posting on the Statewide Injured Worker List.  
2. The Department’s Human Resources Recruitment Division will remove the injured worker’s name from the Statewide Injured Workers List when notified that the worker is no longer eligible for placement or retention on this list \(see \#3 below\). 
3. An injured employee shall be ineligible for placement or retention on the State Wide Injured Worker List when the employee has: a. Refused appropriate modified duty; b. Declined interviews;  c. Declined offers of suitable employment; d. Retired; e. Terminated for cause; f. Lost reemployment/reinstatement rights for any reason defined under ORS 659A.043 or ORS 659A.046; g. Otherwise separated from state service; h. Failed to notify the agency of injury of changes in address, telephone number, return to work status, or medical status; or i. Been on the list more than three years from the date of injury.

### D. Continuation of Benefits

1. The Department will follow the requirements of OAR 659A.063, “State to continue group benefits for injured worker and covered dependents; when ended”. 
2. Any collections due to overpayment will be enacted in accordance with any applicable collective bargaining agreement, DOC Policy, State of Oregon payroll rules and/or policy, and/or any other applicable OAR or ORS. \(Listing order does not construe order of process\).

### E. Filling a Vacancy

When filling a vacant classification, the Department of Corrections Human Resources Recruitment Division will:

1. Check the State Wide Injured Worker List of qualified injured workers of the appropriate class; and 
2. Offer the position to the qualified injured worker who has been on the State Wide Injured Worker List the longest, if qualified for the position; and 
3. Notify the agency-of-injury if the injured worker fails to respond or accept the position. The recruitment unit may code the State Wide Injured Worker List with the disposition code that indicates the employee’s failure to respond or refusal of the job.

### F. Employees will:

1. Report all accidents, incidents, near-miss, and work-related injuries/illness to the supervisor immediately or no later than the end of the work shift whether or not medical care is received or anticipated. If the immediate supervisor is not available, the report will be made to the next level supervisor or the assigned safety manager; and 
2. If involved in an accident/incident and/or a near-miss complete an “Oregon Department of Corrections Employee/Volunteer Report of Incident/Near-Miss/Injury/Illness” form CD 1381 \(5/02\) \(attached\) to document the accident, incident, injury, illness and/or near-miss that may have occurred during the work shift and forward it immediately upon completion to the supervisor; and 
3. Complete a SAIF Corporation 801 Claim form \(U:\General Information\Forms\Safety Forms, or U:\Human Resources\Safety and Risk\Safety Forms, or downloadable from www.SAIF.com under “Filing a Claim”\) to file a claim for workers’ compensation benefits for an on-the-job injury/illness if the employee has received or intends to receive medical attention and the employee intends to file a claim for workers’ compensation benefits \(See Section IV, Policy Clarification, C.\). This form must be completed immediately or within 24 hours of the time the employee knows he/she will be seeking medical treatment for an on-the job injury/illness. If the employee has filed a SAIF 827 “Worker's and Physician’s Report for Worker’s Compensation Claims” at his/her treating physician’s office, then the employee will also complete a SAIF 801 form and immediately forward to the assigned safety manager. All SAIF claims will be submitted to SAIF five days from the employer’s date of knowledge of the claim. The employee is responsible for completing the SAIF 801 form and forwarding it to the assigned safety manager or designee \(if the safety manager is unavailable\) for submission to SAIF within this time limit; and 
4. Provide the assigned safety manager and/or designee with a medical status report prepared by the attending physician \(Within Attachment A or treating physician generated medical status statement\) within 24 hours of medical treatment. These medical status report\(s\) will contain only specific and objective information such as; employee capabilities, limitations, and prognosis so that the assigned safety manger in consultation with the supervisor may determine if there is any temporary modified duty work available; and 
5. When off work due to an on-the-job injury, contact the assigned safety manager or designee every week \(calling in weekly is normally limited to a four week time period of time loss\) to report his/her medical condition. Employees who are off work for extended periods \(four weeks or longer\) shall contact the assigned safety manager or designee whenever there is a change in medical conditions that affect the return-to-work status. Employees shall also provide physician updates after claim related doctor visits, such as employee capabilities, limitations, and prognosis, so the assigned safety manger in consultation with the supervisor may determine an appropriate transitional work or modified duty assignment when the employee is released to such work; and 
6. Provide the assigned safety manager and supervisor with a current phone number, even an unlisted one, and address; and 
7. Cooperate with the assigned safety manager, their supervisor, human resource manager, and/or SAIF Corporation in efforts to identify appropriate modified duty assignments and/or available and suitable work, and report for duty to such assignments; and 
8. Be subject to initiation of employment disciplinary processes through failure to cooperate in this program as outlined in this policy.

### G. Supervisors will:

1. Investigate all accidents and/or incidents with the aid of the affected employee and/or the assigned safety manager; and
2. Complete the “Oregon Department of Corrections Supervisor’s Analysis of the Incident/Near-Miss/Injury/Illness” form CD 1381 \(5/02\) as soon as it is completed by the employee and provided to the supervisor, and distribute as noted on the form; and
3. Forward the SAIF 801 form to the assigned safety manager for completion \(if delivered to the supervisor\); and
4. Review the ERTW process with the employee; and
5. Immediately contact the assigned safety manager to initiate the ERTW program when the treating physician releases the on-the-job injured/ill employee to temporary modified work.

### H. Assigned Unit Safety Managers will:

1. Complete the SAIF 801 form, forwarding it to SAIF Corporation within five days of knowledge of a claim, and provide a copy to the Department’s Administrator of Safety & Risk; and 
2. Initiate the ERTW process following the SAIF Claims Management Flow Chart \(Attachment A\); and 
3. Work with the injured worker’s supervisor to locate and provide temporary modified transitional work when available and appropriate; and 
4. Maintain and provide copies of all approved physician signed job descriptions and letters of job offer to the Department’s Administrator of Safety and Risk; and 
5. Notify the East or West FMLA/OFLA coordinator when a claim results in time-loss; and 
6. Be the liaison between the treating physician and the department; and 
7. Be the liaison between SAIF Corporation and the department; and 
8. Notify the Department’s Administrator of Safety and Risk when an employee who has sustained a compensable injury and is disabled and/or permanently restricted from performing the duties of the worker’s position at time of injury; and 
9. Utilize the Workers’ Compensation Division’s Employee-At-InjuryProgram \(EAIP\) in all applicable situations; and 
10. Review the "Oregon Department of Corrections Supervisor’s Analysis of the Incident/Near-Miss/Injury/Illness" form CD 1381 \(5/02\), working with the supervisor to prevent re-occurrences and/or to correct hazardous conditions; and 
11. Consult with the Department’s Administrator of Safety & Risk in working with the Preferred Worker Program. 

## IV. POLICY CLARIFICATION

### A. Early-Return-To Work and Off-the-Job Injuries:

1. Transitional work assignments or temporary modified work provisions as outlined in III Policy, A, Early Return to Work \(ERTW\), 2, 3, may be used for off-the-job injured employees if it is possible and/or appropriate to return the off-the-job injured employee to temporary modified work. 
2. Employees seeking temporary transitional work or modified duty for an off-the-job injury/illness will provide an “Employee Medical Release Authorization” \(within ODOC Medical Status Report, or similar document\) prior to any temporary work job offer. This release shall not be construed as a general release of medical information but as an authorization that the employee and treating physician can provide only information necessary to return the off-the-job inured employee to a temporary transitional modified work assignment. 
3. The on-the-job injured employee has a higher priority for placement in transitional assignments or temporary modified work and could displace an off-the-job injured employee if there is not sufficient work for both. 
4. The rate of compensation \(pay\) for an off-the-job injured employee working in transitional work or modified duty shall be determined by the assigned Human Resources Manager in consultation with the employee’s supervisor.

### B. The Department of Corrections:

Has neither the duty nor legal authority to create a position for returning an injured employee back to work.

### C. Employees:

Have the legal right not to file a claim for workers’ compensation benefits if they so choose. Refusal to sign or file a claim form for an on-the-job injury will be documented by the assigned safety manager and the employee’s supervisor.

> Note: The Department of Corrections encourages all employees who suspect that they were injured on-the-job to file a claim for workers’ compensation benefits.

## V. IMPLEMENTATION

This policy will be adopted immediately without further modification.

**Certified:** Birdie Worley, Rules Coordinator

**Approved:** Mitch Morrow, Deputy Director

