# 20.7.6 - Basic Corrections Course

| **Effective:** | 11/01/2013 |
| :--- | :--- |
| **Supersedes:** | 01/03/2013 |
| **Applicability:** |  All DOC staff in a DPSST certifiable position |
| **Directives / Cross-Reference:** | DOC policies 20.1.5 \(Essential Functions of DPSST Certifiable Position\) ORS 181.610 to 181.712 OAR 259-008-0025 |
| **Attachments:** | None |

## I. PURPOSE

To provide all ODOC facilities a standardized process to implement the Department of Public Safety Standards and Training \(DPSST\) certified Basic Corrections Course \(BCC\) in compliance with ORS 181.610 to 181.712 and OAR 259-008-0025. This comprehensive program will prepare correctional officers to perform their duties and receive the state correctional officer certification within the context of the mission, vision, values, and goals of the department.

## II. DEFINITIONS

| **A. Adjunct Instructor:** |
| :--- |
| BCC classroom instructor and force skills instructors certified through DPSST. |
| **B. Classroom Curriculum:** |
| Statewide standardized classroom based training approved through the Professional Development Unit and certified by DPSST. |
| **C. Correctional Officer Trial Service Period:** |
| First year of employment with the department/specific institution. |
| **D. Corrections Career Officer Development \(CCOD\):** |
| Correctional officers, who have not been employed as such for between 2-1/2 years and five 5 years, must satisfactorily complete a Career Officer Development Course approved by DPSST. The portion of the BCC that makes up classroom courses, on-line courses, Learning Events \(LE\), Reality Based Scenario \(RBS\), final test, and weapons training and qualification \(for medium facilities and above\). |
| **E. Corrective Training:** |
| Training above and beyond normal standards. Presented to a trainee who is not performing to the standards necessary for certification. |
| **F. Electronic Training Log:** |
| Utilized by field training officers, field training supervisor, or OIC as a tool for tracking daily progress of the trainee, throughout their trial service period. |
| **G. Failure to Train:** |
| A trainee not performing to standard after corrective training has been offered. |
| **H. Field Training and Evaluation Program \(FTEP\):** |
| A comprehensive, training program as part of the Basic Corrections Course, consisting of on-the-job training, RBS ,LE, final test, electronic training log, weekly/monthly evaluations with an assigned qualified Field Training Officer, tracking, testing and documentation of the trainees’ progress throughout the trial service period. |
| **I. Field Training Instructor Guide:** |
| The training guide used by the FTO that contains the procedures, instructions, training standards, and curriculum necessary to complete the training program. |
| **J. Field Training Manual:** |
| Required to be completed by the field training officer and trainee prior to completion of the trainee’s Final Review Board meeting. |
| **K. Field Training Officer \(FTO\):** |
| The appointed staff member who has completed the DPSST certified training for field training officers and is responsible for instructing, guiding, monitoring and providing LE to trainees through FTEP. The FTO will submit weekly and/or monthly evaluations to the field training supervisor, during the on-the-job training phase, which may be used to determine the future status of the trainee. |
| **L. Field Training Supervisor \(FTS\):** |
| An institution-based, management service, staff member assigned to manage and coordinate the FTEP. The primary liaison in contact with PDU coordinator pertaining to training and certification. The FTS must meet the qualifications of an FTO. |
| **M. Final Board Review:** |
| Functional unit manager or designee, FTS, PDU coordinator, and others as assigned review each training record after all BCC training requirements have been met. This meeting should occur in the 9th month of hire. |
| **N. FTO Trainer:** |
| FTS, PDU coordinator, and other staff successfully completing an FTEP train the trainer course. |
| **O. Monthly Observation Report \(MOR\):** |
| Utilized by the field training officer, field training supervisor, or OIC as a tool for tracking monthly progress of the trainee throughout their trial service. This is the same form used for the Weekly/Monthly Observation Report and identified by circling the ‘MONTHLY’ option. |
| **P. On-line Training:** |
| Statewide standardized computer-based on-line training developed and/or approved through the Professional Development Unit and certified by DPSST. |
| **Q. PDU Coordinator:** |
| PDU representative assigned to the local institution. |
| **R. Reality Based Scenario:** |
| A tool to measure the trainee’s ability to demonstrate specific skills outlined within designated core tasks. S. Reality Based Training: Interactive scenarios used to instruct students on verbal and/or physical skills using commonly encountered situations found in a correctional environment. |
| **T. Standardized Evaluation Guideline:** |
| Job performance standards and descriptions used in the completion of observation reports to gauge how well a trainee must perform in order to pass the FTEP satisfactorily. |
| **U. Temporary Hire:** |
| An employee hired to meet workload needs that are emergency, nonrecurring, or short-term when the use of existing positions or establishing new positions is not appropriate or feasible. Correctional officers who have not completed the Basic Course must begin training within 90 days of their initial date of employment.  |
| **V. Trainee:** |
| A new correctional officer hired to work at the department who has not yet completed trial service. |
| **W. Weekly Observation Report \(WOR\):** |
| Utilized by the field training officer for weekly documentation of the trainee’s progress throughout their on-the-job training. This is the same form used for the Weekly/Monthly Observation Report and identified by circling the ‘WEEKLY’ option. |

## III. POLICY

The department shall provide consistent training for all newly hired correctional officers in accordance with ORS 181.610 to ORS 181.712 and OAR 259-008-0025. The Professional Development Unit of the Human Resources Division is responsible for implementing the program with the assistance of other units as directed by this policy. This policy shall serve as the primary document to guide all aspects of the delivery of the BCC and will be supplemented, where noted, by internal processes developed by the Professional Development Unit.

### A. Overview

The BCC is a yearlong program incorporating classroom training, on-line courses, health and fitness testing, force skills training, and a comprehensive FTEP.

1. The program will be designed by a representative workgroup of certified staff along with PDU representatives. 
2. The program will be approved through the Corrections Policy Committee of the Board on Public Safety Standards and Training in accordance with ORS 181.610 to 181.712. 
3. The program will be certified by DPSST and portable to other correctional agencies in Oregon. Consequently, standardization and objectivity in delivery are core principles that must be adhered to. The content of the program may not be altered at the institution level.

### B. Responsibilities: 

1. Professional Development Unit:  a. Manage statewide BCC Program  b. Liaison with DPSST, Corrections Policy Committee and Board on Public Safety Standards and Training for certification related matters  c. Arrange/conduct all BCC instructor and FTO training  d. Manage instructor certification process through DPSST  e. Manage new correctional officer certification process through DPSST  f. Maintain final trainee BCC records  g. In cooperation with the field training supervisors, coordinate delivery of all aspects of the BCC program  h. Instruct all classes in which requested/certified  i. Arrange adjunct instructors for specialty courses  j. Update curriculum  k. Notify the institutions of non-compliance and instructor availability issues 
2. Operations Division:  a. Coordinate with designated PDU staff member to coordinate the BCC program.  b. Manage local Field Training and Evaluation Program to align with BCC.  c. Plan hiring practices where practicable to align with scheduled classes  d. Identify instructors to assist with BCC, including Health Services and Behavioral Health Services.  e. Provide weapons and ammunition for firearms training. Provide other equipment as available to assist with training.

### C. Implementation:

1. Each facility along with the local PDU representative will determine a yearly schedule for the delivery of the BCC classes. 
2. BCC classes will be scheduled to maximize agency resources and PDU logistical support. Hiring at institutions should be coordinated to minimize the time between the hiring of a correctional officer and the beginning of the BCC program. Optimally, a newly hired correctional officer will begin the BCC within the first week of employment.

### D. Required Attendees:

1. All new correctional officers hired by the department, or correctional officers returning to the department after an absence of five or more years, shall begin the BCC Program within 90 days of employment and complete the program within the first year of employment. 
2. All previously certified department employees having held a DOC non-certified position for 2-1/2 to 5 years and transfer back to a certified position must complete the DPSST Corrections Career Officer Development Course or a DOC alternative within a year of the transfer. 
3. All non-certified employees who transfer to a correctional officer, corporal, sergeant, lieutenant, captain, security manager or assistant superintendent of security position must complete the BCC program within a year of the transfer. 
4. Staff members who have completed and passed the first two weeks of the BCC program while serving in a non-security capacity within the previous year, are not required to re-take the first two weeks of training, provided the curriculum is the same and there have not been any significant policy changes within that time period.

### E. Training:

1. All training shall be delivered by ODOC approved and DPSST certified instructors. 
2. Only ODOC approved and DPSST certified training material may be used in the BCC program. The PDU administrator or his/her designees are the only authorized approvers of training materials. DPSST must certify all DOC approved curriculum prior to delivery.

3. Trainees are required to adhere to DPSST student conduct requirements and the Criminal Justice Code of Ethics Commission of a “Zero Tolerance Offense” as identified in OAR 259-008-0025. Any violation is grounds for removal from the program. Students shall be instructed on the required conduct during the first day of training. 
4. Trainees shall complete at least four weeks of training at minimum institutions and five weeks of training at medium and above institutions before being assigned a post on the roster. Trainees must also complete all of the LE identified in the BCC program before attending the skills week training. FTO’s shall be relieved from post as necessary to carry out their portion of the BCC program. This will include completion of RBS and LE. 
5. Trainees shall not be pulled from class to attend to institution operations except by approval of the assistant superintendent of security in conjunction with the FTS. These instances should be limited to bona-fide emergencies and institution operations in which the training benefit to the students exceeds the cost, time, and resources to rescheduling training. All training missed must be rescheduled.

F. Paperwork and Records:

1. The institution will submit all required paperwork to the PDU-BCC certification coordinator no later than 14 days prior to class starting.  a. PDU will notify institutions of required paperwork. At a minimum, the F-2 \(Medical Exam\), F-4 \(Personnel Action Report\) and F-5 \(Application for Training\) must be submitted to DPSST.  b. The PDU-BCC certification coordinator will submit required paperwork to DPSST on behalf of the institution, and make all necessary notifications once approval for training has been received. This includes F-2 Medical Exam prescreenings. 
2. The following files must be kept at the institution with the FTS and then transferred to PDU upon completion of trial service or removal of the student from trial service.  a. Student file   b. Weekly Observation Reports   c. Monthly Observation Reports   d. Electronic training logs   e. Six written reports   f. Field Training Manual 
3. Enterprise Learning Management System \(ELMS\):   a. The department will utilize the iLearn Oregon ELMS for management of the instructor records and scheduling, student records, rosters, curriculum, LE, online courses, and BCC records.  b. All instructors, FTO’s, PDU staff, ISDS coordinators and others who support the BCC will have a basic knowledge of iLearn and how to utilize the system for their work processes.

G. Instructors: 

1. Qualifications: a. Must have three years law enforcement/corrections experience or related field and have completed initial correctional officer trial service or possess other qualifying professional experience. b. Must possess good communication skills, both written and verbal. c. Must have one year free of any type of work related work plans or disciplinary actions. d. Must be able to obtain and maintain instructor certification through DPSST. e. Must have completed an ODOC approved instructor development course. f. FTO’s: Must have completed initial correctional officer trial service and may be officer, corporal or sergeant. 
2. Application and Selection Process \(required for FTO’s, optional for other instructors\): a. Announcement is made at each facility. b. Announcement includes a brief description of the program, the qualifications, and the duties. c. Announcements shall be posted, for a minimum of 14 days prior to the interview, via the Info-Lines, staff newsletters, roll call \(muster\), bulletin boards and/or by electronic media. Locations of applications will be included in the announcement. d. Applications will be reviewed and accepted, or declined. Incomplete applications will not be considered. e. When currently trained instructors transfer from one DOC institution/facility to another, he/she must re-apply at the new location. Therefore, voluntary transfers may forfeit instructor status. 
3. Interview Process \(required for FTO’s, optional for other instructors\): a. The applicant will receive written notification of accepted application, and instructions on the interview process. b. Interviews are conducted individually. c. The interview panel will consist of a minimum of three members to include an FTEP supervisor and a represented staff member. d. Final selection is made by the FTEP supervisor, the functional unit manager, or designee. 
4. Training:  
  
   a. PDU shall make available an adequate number of instructor development courses to ensure a sufficient pool of certified instructors.

  
   b. FTOs are required to attend and graduate from a DOC 40-hour FTEP training course.  
  
   c. Maintenance training for all FTOs will normally be conducted semi-annually and will be coordinated by the FTS in conjunction with PDU coordinator.  
  
   d. Statewide coordination and training for FTS and PDU coordinators will normally be conducted annually and will be coordinated by PDU.  
  
   e. Non-FTO instructors will need to attend an approved instructor development course \(IDC\).   

5. Skills Instructor Requirements:   a. Must meet the requirements as stated in section G. 1. of this policy.   b. The number of skills instructors for each class shall be determined by PDU and Operations administration to meet the needs of the program \(see PDU Procedure 12-01\).   c. A minimum of two range masters are required during any active range session  
6. Documentation, Testing, and Final Board:  a. Weekly Observation Reports \(WOR\) will be completed on a weekly basis for the trainee’s OJT phase of the FTEP training. If time allows, the trainee and the FTO will meet weekly to address the trainee’s progress. Both the trainee and the FTO will sign the WOR indicating both parties discussed and understood the topics identified.   b. Monthly Observation Reports \(MOR\) will be completed on a monthly basis for the trainee’s entire trial service period. The trainee and FTEP supervisor, or designee, will meet monthly to address the trainee’s MOR and Monthly Trainee Feedback Report. Both the trainee and the FTEP supervisor, or designee, will sign the MOR, indicating both parties discussed and understood the topics identified.   c. If corrective training is utilized, it will be documented in the trainee’s electronic training log and/or hard file.   d. The original copy of the entire field training manual \(FTM\) will be placed in the trainee’s BCC file. 
7. FTO/Adjunct Instructor Removal Process:   
  
   a. Being an FTO and adjunct instructor demands the highest standards of professionalism and ethics, due to the nature of being looked upon as a role model for new employees. FTO and adjunct instructors are expected to be professional at all times.  
  
   b. FTO and adjunct instructors will comply with the DOC policies on [**Code of Ethics \(\#20.1.2\)**](20.1.2-code-of-ethics/) **** and [**Code of Conduct \(\#20.1.3\)**](20.1.3-code-of-conduct.md). Additionally, as DPSST certified instructors, FTOs and adjunct instructors who fail to meet DPSST requirement will be removed.

   > _**FTOs should be held to the Code of Ethics -**_ [_**"CD 1382",**_](20.1.2-code-of-ethics/cd-1382.md) _**not the actual policy.**_

   c. FTO and adjunct instructors must be reliable. If on a work improvement plan or not demonstrating reliability in their regular duty post and scheduled meetings or training, they may be reviewed for possible suspension or removal.  
  
   d. FTO and adjunct instructors that have been identified as being deficient will have six months to correct that deficiency, unless the nature of the deficiencies demand immediate removal for the good of the team or the safety and security of the institution. FTO and adjunct instructors may be removed, pending completion of any administrative action. At the conclusion of any administrative review, the functional unit manager may, at his/her discretion, reinstate the FTO to the team.  
  
   e. Failure to meet these standards will result in the FTO and adjunct instructor’s removal. FTS or PDU coordinators shall forward applicable documentation to the functional unit manager or designee in order to track member deficiencies.  


   f. FTO and adjunct instructors that are on work limitations or restrictions, upon review by the functional unit manager or designee, may be suspended until the limitation or restrictions are corrected or completed, at which time, another review will be conducted for reinstatement.  
  
   g. FTO and adjunct instructors who receive disciplinary action\(s\) will have their selection reviewed for suitability for continued participation by the functional unit manager or designee.  
  
   h. All force skills instructors will be held to the above standards as well as having no disciplinary actions related to use-of-force issues.  

8. FTO Assignments \(for AOCE represented facilities\)  a. Field training officers shall be assigned consistent with each local institution practice.  b. FTOs will continue to be assigned consistent with current practice

## III. IMPLEMENTATION

This policy will be adopted immediately without further modification.

**Certified:** Birdie Worley, Rules Coordinator

**Approved:** Mitch Morrow, Deputy Director

